  Chapter 2: On Modeling Teachers' In-the-Moment Decision MakingAuthor(s): Alan H. SchoenfeldSource: Journal for Research in Mathematics Education. Monograph, Vol. 14, A Study ofTeaching: Multiple Lenses, Multiple Views (2008), pp. 45-96Published by: National Council of Teachers of MathematicsStable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/30037741Accessed: 11-10-2018 16:37 UTC JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a widerange of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity andfacilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available athttps://about.jstor.org/terms Chapter 2 On Modeling Teachers' In-the-Moment Decision Making Alan H. Schoenfeld University of California at Berkeley OVERVIEW The preceding chapter, by Ball, Lewis, and Thames, documents the extraordi- nary complexity of teachers' work. Teachers have multiple goals, along multiple dimensions. They do work along the lines of elucidating mathematical content and processes. They do the work of creating and maintaining a classroom discourse community, in which the discourse reflects and respects a certain set of intellec- tual values. They do the work of understanding and relating to individual students, both with regard to their content-related understandings and with regard to their growth as human beings (see also Lampert, 2001). All this takes place in a dynam- ic environment in which classroom conversations can take unexpected twists and turns. As they work, teachers face a range of choices regarding possible actions, where pursuing one path may well mean forgoing others. One way to view such teaching, then, is as managing and resolving dilemmas (Ball, 1993, 1997; Ball & Wilson, 1996; Lampert, 1985). Seen this way, teaching can be regarded as an art form-grounded in principle, yet often spontaneous and opportunistic. The issue addressed in this chapter is whether such in-the-moment decision making can be modeled, using the standard modeling tools of cognitive science. In this chapter introduction, I provide some background regarding the teacher- modeling enterprise and the reasons that the January 19, 1990, lesson represents an interesting and important test case for it. For more than a decade, the University of California at Berkeley's Teacher Model Group (TMG) has worked toward developing a theory of teaching-in- context. Its goal is to provide a detailed theoretical account of how and why teachers make the choices they make while they are engaged in the act of teach- ing. Through 1996, most of TMG's work focused on analyzing mathematics and science teaching at the secondary and postsecondary levels. Detailed studies had been produced of Mark Nelson, a beginning teacher conducting a straightfor- ward content-oriented lesson (Zimmerlin & Nelson, 1999); of Jim Minstrell, an experienced teacher conducting an innovative science lesson of his own design (Schoenfeld, Minstrell, & van Zee, 1999); and of Alan Schoenfeld teaching hisp. [45] 46 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions college-level course on mathematical problem solving (Arcavi, Kessel, Meira, & Smith, 1998; Schoenfeld, 1998a). These studies, and the structure of a model of teaching, are described in Schoenfeld (1998b). The claim made in Schoenfeld (1998b) is that the theory of teaching-in-context provides a general explanatory frame for understanding how and why teachers make the choices that they do in the midst of teaching, as a function of their knowledge, goals, and beliefs. In support of that claim, we should note that sig- nificant differences existed among the cases that TMG analyzed. The cases in- cluded beginning and experienced teachers, traditional and nonstandard lessons, and very different types of classroom interactions. In addition, huge differences in personal style were evident among the teachers studied. At the same time, the content, grade range, and classroom interactions spanned by those analyses (high school and college mathematics and physics) covered only a small part of the "teaching space"-that is, the range of teaching behaviors and contexts in general is much larger than the potential span of the examples that had been analyzed to date. Moreover, each of the lessons studied, even though wide- ranging with regard to content and classroom interactions, adhered closely to the teacher's agenda. For many reasons, Ball's January 19, 1990, lesson is an ideal test case for the theory of teaching-in-context. Hers is a third grade class. All sorts of social, cog- nitive, and developmental issues that are not obviously present in high school or college students are central in this elementary school classroom. The teacher seems to play a much less direct role in shaping the course of events than do the teachers in the other lessons modeled by TMG. Indeed, the direction of the lesson seems to emerge as a function of what unfolds during the classroom con- versations. Moreover, whereas each of the other lessons has a reasonably simple structure that corresponds to the teacher's intentions, this lesson (including the 6 minutes on which this analysis focuses) has so many twists and turns that no straightforward analysis appears likely to capture what happened. The challenge, then, is to determine whether the teacher's actions can be modeled. Success in the modeling enterprise would provide confirming evidence of the accuracy of the theory of teaching-in-context, and of the models derived from it; it would also help elucidate the knowledge and skills employed by the teacher during the com- plex act of teaching such a highly interactive, contingent lesson. Failure would help to specify the limits of the theory. The structure of this chapter is as follows. I begin with a discussion of theories and models, and of the role that modeling a specific lesson segment can play in theory testing. I continue with a brief characterization of the theoretical perspec- tive that provides the underpinnings of the work of the Teacher Model Group and a description of the representational form used by TMG to model the details of a lesson. Next I provide a brief narrative overview of the lesson segment in ques- tion. I then present an analysis of the lesson segment. The analysis unfolds in four phases. The first phase characterizes a simple iterative routine that can be used to debrief students on a topic. The second phase expands on this routine, describingp. 46 Alan H. Schoenfeld 47 a "flexible, interruptable" routine that can serve a teacher's debriefing purposes but can also be interrupted to pursue other high-priority goals. I claim that Ball's teaching during the first 6 minutes of the lesson corresponds, with great fidelity, to this second routine. The third phase provides the warrants for that claim. I analyze the transcript on a line-by-line basis, examining the decisions Ball made and the rationales underlying them. That analysis has three major goals. It seeks to indi- cate, first, that Ball's decisions and actions during the 6-minute episode do indeed correspond to the routine described in the second phase.1 It further indicates that her choices, while made spontaneously, can be seen as principled and consistent in the light of her beliefs, goals, and knowledge. The fine-grained discussion of Ball's decisions establishes the basis for developing a model of her teaching dur- ing this lesson segment. In the fourth phase, I discuss the specifics of the model and the ways in which it represents aspects of Ball's teaching. This consideration, in turn, establishes the context for the concluding discussion. There I discuss the status and utility of models of the type discussed in this chapter. ASPECTS OF A THEORY OF TEACHING-IN-CONTEXT AND MODELS THAT CORRESPOND TO IT I begin with a brief introduction to the ideas underlying the theory of teaching- in-context developed by the Teacher Model Group. An extensive discussion of the theoretical enterprise and descriptions of several case studies can be found in Schoenfeld (1998b). TMG's goal is to specify an analytic structure that enables one to characterize, in fine detail, the how and the why of an individual teacher's actions and decisions in the classroom. The structure is intended to be broad enough to characterize all teaching, from the most conservative instruction employing lectures or worksheets to the most radical attempts to foster highly interactive learning communities. The characterization of any particular teacher's actions (in a particular context) is pre- sented as a model of his or her teaching (in that context). On theories and models The term model has multiple meanings in the education community. Among them one finds "to characterize the inner workings, in precise analytic terms" (as in a model of working memory), "exemplary" (as in a model lesson), and "to demonstrate" (as in she will model the approach in her sample lesson). TMG uses the term in the first sense. A model of a teacher conducting a particular lesson is a theory-based analytical characterization of the teacher's actions that explains 1 An essential point to note is that the routine is one of many routines that Ball, a very accomplished teacher, has at her disposal. This chapter should not be misread as suggesting that this methodology is her only, or even primary, teaching routine; it is one she uses for a particular kind of situation, in which she wishes to uncover and explore the class's understandings of a particular topic. Evidence shows that this routine is far from idiosyncratic and is in fact employed by some other accomplished teachers as well: see Schoenfeld, 2002.p. 47 48 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions how and why the teacher made the choices he or she did while teaching. I use the term theory as defined in Webster's New Universal Unabridged Dictionary: "a formulation of apparent relationships or underlying principles of certain observed phenomena which has been verified to some degree." Any modeling enterprise involves complex relationships among the theory that underlies the models, the models themselves, and the objects and relationships being modeled. The theory specifies a general class of relationships, delineating the components of models and the relationships among them. Working within this well-specified structure, researchers model phenomena of interest. The act of modeling serves as a dialectic mediating process between the theory and the phenomena being modeled. In one direction, a detailed theory-based model of a particular situation (in this instance, the teaching of a lesson or lesson segment) is intended to help develop a deeper understanding of what took place in that situation. In the other direction, the adequacy of the model-based description and explanation sheds light on the adequacy of the theory and serves as a mechanism for theory refinement. A failure of the model of an event to conform well to that event points to possible weaknesses in, or limitations of, the underlying theory. To illustrate the relationship between theories and models, I discuss Sir Isaac Newton's formulation of a theory of gravitation. Newton posited that the gravita- tional attraction between two bodies is directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. In the abstract, this gravitational theory applies to any two objects, which may range in size from subatomic particles to supernovas. It is remarkably general. How does one test such a theory? It cannot be tested all at once, but it can be tested on important subclasses of phenomena. For example, one might determine how well the theory does in characterizing the motion of planets within particular solar systems. Any specific solar system can be modeled using the laws of motion and the theory of gravitation. One can specify the positions, masses, velocities, and accelerations of the objects in the solar system at some particular time, past or present. Then one can run the model according to Newton's laws and predict the positions of those objects at various times after the start time. Doing so allows one to ascertain how well the model's predictions match the reality-that is, how good the theory is. The modeling process fleshes out a theory in a number of ways. First and most important during theory development, it provides an empirical yardstick by which the accuracy of the theory can be assessed. If, for example, the use of gravitational theory results in the prediction of a lunar eclipse (or any other celestial event) and the eclipse does not take place, then one has good reason to be concerned about the theory! Accurate predictions, whether or not they are of practical import, serve as substantiating evidence that the objects and relationships specified in the theory are indeed correctly specified. Of course, substantiation using just one model is likely to be inadequate for a theory with wide-ranging applications; a range of models may be necessary to test the range and scope of the theory. In addition, models can have practical uses as well as theoretical ones. Once a theory is reasonably wellp. 48 Alan H. Schoenfeld 49 established, practical applications tend to become increasingly important. The same principles hold for theories and models of teaching. A general theo- retical frame for examining teaching is as follows. Teaching entails knowledge- dependent decision making during a complex and highly interactive social activity. Any theory of teaching thus involves many of the features of a theory of human activity in complex social settings. Hence any theory of teaching must have much in common with general theories of cognition. The TMG's work is grounded in general cognitive theory, and its core components (representations) consist of a teachers' knowledge, goals, beliefs, and a decision-making mecha- nism. Its broad claim is that one can explain how and why a teacher does what he or she does in the classroom as a function of that teacher's knowledge, goals, beliefs, and decision making. One way to explore the credibility of that claim is to try to construct models of different examples of classroom teaching. Thus, detailed models of specific instances of teaching play a very important role in examining the validity of the theory of teaching-in-context. Modeling specific cases tests whether the theory offers the tools to provide accurate descriptions and explanations of those cases. Modeling a range of cases (a beginning high school teacher working through a lesson covering straightforward procedural content, an experienced high school teacher guiding students through a very innovative lesson, a third-grade teacher cocreating her agenda with her students...) tests the scope of the theory. At the same time at least two kinds of practical implications are evident. The first is that the specific cases examined were chosen because of their intrinsic interest, and the models help explain just what the teachers were doing and why. In some instances the analyses point to pitfalls that might have been avoided; in others they point to skills or activity patterns that might not be apparent on casual (or even not-so- casual) observation. The second is that the modeling process can "unpack" some pedagogical routines that may have general utility. In this chapter I use a specific interactive routine to model Ball's teaching during the first 6 minutes of the January 19, 1990, lesson. The same routine turns out to be useful for modeling lessons taught by others, including Jim Minstrell and myself. Minstrell's lesson had some goals for student understanding and participation that were similar to Ball's but looked very different on the surface. Mine had slightly different goals, and looked different on the surface as well. This applicability suggests that the routine might be an effective way of achieving those and similar goals, and that other teachers might also learn to use the routine. For details see Schoenfeld, 2002. The structure of the models we employ The main theoretical idea is that what a teacher decides to do while engaged in teaching is a function of the teacher's goals (some of which are determined prior to the instruction and some of which emerge as the lesson unfolds), beliefs (which serve to re-prioritize goals as some goals are satisfied or new goals emerge), and knowledge (including various routines the teacher has for achieving variousp. 49 50 Modeling Teachers'Decisions goals). The TMG's work provides a framework for describing and representing sequences of instruction. The full parsing of the lesson segment analyzed in this paper can be found in Appendix 2A. By way of introduction, Figure 2.1 provides a simplified version of Appendix 2A. A transcript is given in the column at the far left of the representation. The les- son in its entirety is represented by one box in the column to the right of the tran- script. The lesson is then parsed into "episodes," which are represented in Figure 2.1 by boxes numbered [1] and [2] in the next column to the right. The first major episode of the lesson represented in Figure 2.1, labeled [1], was the discussion of the previous day's meeting. It was followed by the class's extended discussion of Sean's conjecture that the number six can be both even and odd (the "evenness conjecture"). That discussion is labeled as episode [2]. Episode [3], not indicated in Figure 2.1, consisted of a classroom discussion in which the students reflected on the nature and purposes of their work. Indicators that each of these lesson seg- ments is an episode at this level of parsing are (a) that each is coherent on its own terms (in this instance, each is "about" something) and (b) that the focus of each is different. The next column in Figure 2.1 represents a decomposition of these episodes into smaller units. Episode [I] is parsed into five subepisodes, labeled [1.1 ] through [1.5]. These subepisodes represent an exchange between Ball and Sheena, a con- versation between Sean and Sheena regarding the nature of zero, an exchange be- tween Ball and Mei, an extended discussion of a statement made by Nathan, and a brief exchange between Ball and Sean. Since it is intended to be just illustrative, Figure 2.1 stops at this level of parsing. In general a full parsing continues down to the level of individual lines of dialogue uttered by the teacher and students. To the right of the episode parsing, one finds representations of the teacher's attributed goals, beliefs, knowledge, and decision making. Goals are divided into three categories. Overarching goals (goals A, B, and C in this episode) are the consistent long-term goals that the teacher has for a class. They tend to mani- fest themselves frequently in instruction. They are often "in the background," increasing in activation when circumstances warrant. One aspect of Ball's teach- ing, for example, is that (Goal A) she wants to create a discourse community that, by virtue of respectful interactions, supports meaningful inquiry. A second (Goal B) is that Ball wants her students to engage in various kinds of specifically mathematical discourse, including making, clarifying, and evaluating mathemati- cal claims. A third (Goal C) is that she has a strong desire to understand her stu- dents' thinking-she tends to question her students if she is unclear about their thinking and the circumstances seem appropriate. Major instructional goals (goals D and E here) may be oriented toward content or toward building a classroom community. Content goals tend to be more short-term, reflecting major aspects of the teacher's agenda for the day or unit. For example, Goal D is Ball's goal of "debriefing" the students regarding the previous day's meeting. It has extremely high activation during episodes [1.1], [1.3], and [1.5], and somewhat less activa- tion during episodes [1.2] and [1.4]. Goals F through J are "local" goals, tied top. 50 The The Transcript Lesson The Segment Chosen for Analysis First Level Overarching of Parsing Goals* Major Content Local gz. Social Goals* Goals* Relevant Knowledge Decision- Making Beliefs ABC DE FGH I J (Preliminaries) [1] Discussion Of Previous Day's Meeting (The First Six Minutes Of Class) [1.1] Ball Exchange With Sheena [1.2] Sean/Sheena Exchange [13] Ball Exchange With Mei [1.4] Ball Exchange With Nathan [1.5] Ball Exchange With Sean [2.1] Goal Analysis Continues Parsing Continues [2] Discussion Continues The Entire Lesson The Lesson Continues The teacher's beliefs about learning, teaching, students, classroom environments, and mathematics are represented here. Levels of activation are represented in the same way goal activations are. Belief traces are not shown for lack of space. See Appendices 2A and 2C for full detail. The teacher's knowledge relevant to each of the episodes delineated on the left hand side of this figure is described here. For example, knowledge relevant to episode [1.1] includes her understandings of he previous day's meeting, her access to various classroom routines, knowledge of the students, and more. See Appendix 2A for detail. Some break points between episodes represent decisions made by the teacher. The factors that the teacher takes into account, and the reasons for the teacher's decision, are described here. See Appendix 2A for some detail, and the narrative for full detail. *See Appendix 2C for the definitions of Goals A through J. Figure 2.1. A simplified representation of the parsing of a body of instruction. The representation includes the transcript, the iterative decomposition of the instruction into episodes, goal and belief traces, and the teacher's relevant knowledge and decision making.p. [51] 52 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions specific circumstances. Goal F, for example, is to have a student clarify, elaborate, or extend something that he or she has just said. Such a goal is obviously emergent (hence the dotted lines in Figure 2.1); the goal becomes active when a student says something that the teacher believes needs to be refined in some way. Pointed to but not given in Figure 2.1 for reasons of space (but see Appendices 2A and 2C) is a delineation of the teacher's beliefs relevant to instruction and their intensity at various times. The full representation includes beliefs about learning, teaching, students, classroom environment, and mathematics. Beliefs are also rep- resented as vertical bars of varying intensity. One "reads" their intensity the same way as for goals. Following the description of beliefs is a delineation of the teacher's "relevant knowledge"-the many and diverse kinds of knowledge that a teacher can bring to bear during a classroom discussion. Such knowledge includes, of course, the classic categories: subject matter knowledge, general pedagogical knowledge, and pedagogical content knowledge. It also includes knowledge of classroom his- tory-not only the previous day's meeting with fourth graders but also the topics the class has covered and how the discussions have gone. It also includes "other" history, for example, how last year's class dealt with some of these ideas. And it includes knowledge of the students-knowing, for example, that one student tends to call out responses and that another is shy. All this knowledge plays into the decisions that the teacher makes. The teacher's decision making is represented in the final column of Figure 2.1. The reader should note that a teacher is always making decisions; some decisions are just more obvious than others. The clearest cases of decision making occur when some notable event occurs. For example, a student may raise a question. The teacher must decide whether to pursue it, and if so, how. Other less obvi- ous decision points occur in the natural course of events, for example when a planned activity comes to an end. Should the teacher extend it, or move on to the next planned activity? Even if the lesson is unfolding largely as planned, myriad extemporaneous possibilities arise that he or she might consider. Whether and in what way the teacher decides to pursue any of those possibilities depends on circumstances and the teacher's knowledge, goals, and beliefs. Our attributions of the teacher's choices, and the rationales for them, are represented in this final column. A representation such as the one outlined in Figure 2.1 can be used in two rather different ways. First, it can be used as a vehicle for description. One can parse a lesson, and then-using multiple sources of evidence, such as classroom observations, videotape analyses, the teacher's journals or other writings, and in- terviews to triangulate one's choices--delineate our attribution of the teacher's goals, beliefs, knowledge, and decision making. The picture that emerges is a rich, integrated portrayal of how and why the teacher did what he or she did. Second and perhaps more controversial, the theoretical entities represented in Figure 2.1-goals, beliefs, knowledge, and decision-making mechanisms--can be used to produce models of teaching. To model a segment of instruction, onep. 52 Alan H. Schoenfeld 53 gathers various kinds of evidence regarding the teacher's goals, beliefs, and knowl- edge. One looks for consistency in the teacher's actions. This evidence tends to reveal both the teacher's knowledge structures (what routines does the teacher have for dealing with situations of type X?) and decision making (under which circumstances does the teacher tend to act in what ways?). Supporting data may consist of classroom observations, videotape analyses, the teacher's journals or other writings, and interviews with the teacher. All these pieces can be put together as a model that simulates the teacher's deci- sion making and actions. Let us call the model of the teacher MT. One starts with the teacher's "initial state": with what goals does the teacher enter the classroom, and what routines does he or she expect to implement to achieve those goals? This basis becomes the initial state of MT. That is, MT is assigned the teacher's knowledge, goals, beliefs, and decision-making mechanisms. Then a simulated lesson can begin, in which one works through the lesson by following the actions and decisions specified in the model. Working through the lesson consists of up- dating MT's knowledge, goals, and beliefs in response to events as they unfolded in the classroom, and having MT decide what to do at each point by having MT's decision-making mechanism act in response to its current knowledge, goals, and beliefs. What follows are two examples of how MT would make decisions. Example1. Suppose a lesson segment goes as planned. In that event, MT's goals for that lesson segment have been met and their activation levels are thus lowered. New goals corresponding to the next planned lesson segment become highest priority, and MT moves on to the next segment of the lesson just as the teacher would. Example 2. Suppose that at some point in a lesson, a student makes an unex- pected comment. How will MT deal with it? To make the situation specific, I shall briefly recap an episode discussed in Schoenfeld, Minstrell, and van Zee (1999). The episode occurs toward the beginning of the term in a high school phys- ics class. Eight students have measured the width of a table, obtaining values of 106.8, 107.0, 107.0, 107.5, 107.0, 107.0, 106.5, and 106.0 cm. The class has been considering how to determine the "best number" for the table's width. One student suggested the average, another, the mode; those alternatives have been discussed. Then a student makes this comment: This is a little complicated, but, I mean, it might work. If you see that 107 shows up four times, you give it a coefficient of 4, and then 107.5 only shows up one time, you give it a coefficient of 1, you add all those up and then you divide by the number of coefficients you have. A priori, a wide range of responses is possible. One teacher might decide that this statement represents a deflection from his or her agenda, or that sorting through the answer would take too long. That teacher might quickly defer consid- eration of the issue ("Let's talk about it after class") and proceed with the lesson as planned. Another teacher might respond by showing the class that you have to divide by the sum of the coefficients, not the number of coefficients; and that once you realize that fact, the student's suggestion could be construed as a fancy wayp. 53 54 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions of computing the average. Yet another teacher might ask the class to think its way through the issue. Thus, teachers will differ in how they react; correspondingly, models of different teachers will differ in how they react. In the situation analyzed in Schoenfeld, Minstrell, and van Zee (1999), the teacher being modeled had as a very high priority the creation of a classroom community of inquiry in which students are encouraged to make sense of situa- tions. His pedagogical style was to respond to students' comments with questions that help to clarify issues but that put the responsibility for sorting through them on the students' shoulders. In our analysis the model of this teacher, MT, was assigned the knowledge, goals, and beliefs we attributed to the teacher. MT had as a high priority under- standing and honoring student inquiry; MT had a pedagogical style that made heavy use of questions as a way of engaging students and getting them to think through issues. Since the student's comment addressed the "best number" for the width of the table, MT judged it to be relevant. Moreover, MT had the knowledge that would enable it to understand the possible meanings and entailments of the student's suggestion (did the student mean to divide the sum of the numbers by 8, or divide the sum by 5?). The belief that relevant student inquiry should be en- couraged was a very high priority for MT. Thus, even though exploring the issues raised by this student's comment involved a'cost (in time), MT decided to explore them. But how? MT had to choose from among the various routines it knows. In this case, MT's goals, beliefs, and most frequently chosen teaching routine were all in sync: MT's preference is to ask questions that help clarify issues but put the responsibility for sorting through them on the students' shoulders. Thus MT asked the class what they thought of the student's idea (in effect, "What do you think? Does this make sense?") and had them work through it. I shall now abstract this description to characterize the way that TMG's models make decisions in general. A new event (including the completion of planned activities) results in the activation of a new set of goals, beliefs, and knowledge, which, in turn, results in the activation of a set of plausible options (potential action plans) for what to do next. In the model, the choice among those action plans is made on the basis of a cost-benefit analysis. The model considers costs, benefits, and feasibility, as follows: Costs: If this action plan is implemented, what are likely costs in terms of- (a) time? (b) disruption to lesson continuity? (c) pathways not taken, goals not achieved? Benefits: Which high-priority goals are likely to be achievable if this action plan is implemented? Might some serendipitous benefits be realized? Feasibility: What is the likelihood that the goals can be reached, given- (a) the amount of time available,p. 54 Alan H. Schoenfeld 55 (b) the material resources necessary and available, (c) the students' readiness for this plan at this time, and (d) the teacher's confidence in his or her ability to carry out this approach? The decision is made on the basis of those considerations2. The lesson proceeds, and new events result in a continual updating of the current state. Enough abstraction. The next section of chapter provides a narrative description of the first 6 minutes of the lesson in question. The following section models it. THE LESSON SEGMENT IN QUESTION This section presents a chronological narrative of the first 6 minutes of Deborah Ball's January 19, 1990, lesson, highlighting some of the decisions faced by Ball during the lesson segment and the ways in which she resolved them. Ball's class was in the middle of a unit in which they had been exploring the properties of even and odd numbers. Ball had taught a similar unit the previous year. She observed this year that some similar issues had emerged in both classes, and also that some issues had gone unresolved for a long time in the previous year's class. (In fact, the previous year's class was still struggling with such issues as whether the number zero is even, odd, or "special.") For that reason she had arranged a meeting between the two classes. The meeting, which had taken place the previous day, provided a great deal of food for thought for Ball and for her students. Ball wanted to start off the January 19 lesson with a "debriefing"-what sense did the students make of the previous day's conversations? Her plan for the day was as follows: I had planned to spend a few minutes learning what the kids made of this op- portunity to talk about some rather large and perplexing mathematical questions with other kids. Among the things I wondered about is what they would make of hearing that the fourth graders also worried about and were interested in such similar issues, whether they would change any of their ideas from the discussion, and if so, on what basis, and what the overall intellectual and social experience was like for them. I wanted to retum to the class's work on the conjectures about adding even and odd numbers because I was very excited at what looked to me to be one of the first signs that they would seek to prove a generalization through more than empirical data. They seemed on the verge of seeking to prove ana- lytically that an even number plus an even number would always equal an even number, and other related assertions. This is what I had planned to spend the day working on. (Ball, personal communication, April 4, 1999) A transcript of the lesson segment is given inAppendix 1 of this volume. The com- ments in the discussion that follows are keyed to line numbers in the transcript. 2 Some teaching decisions are toss-ups-in some circumstances a teacher might do A or might do B. In other situations, a teacher might be somewhat more inclined to choose A than B, choosing option A about 60% of the time. This tendency can be modeled by assigning probabilities to a range of possible outcomes. When the model is run multiple times, it will make different decisions, just as a teacher might.p. 55 56 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions Ball announces her intentions in Line 1: "I'd like you to be thinking back to yesterday and to the meeting that we had on even and odd numbers and zero.... I'd just like to hear some comments about what you thought about the meeting, what you noticed about the meeting, what you learned at the meeting." This com- ment sets the stage for her interaction with Sheena, who says (Line 2), "when you talk to other classes sometimes it helps." In Lines 3 through 7 Ball helps Sheena refine and articulate her claim. She abstracts Sheena's statement in Line 7, "So you thought about something that came up in the meeting that you hadn't thought about before? Okay." In Line 10, Sean challenges Sheena's statement that zero "could be" even. He asks, "What two things can you put together to make it?"3 The tension is palpable as Sean and Sheena interact in Lines 11-19. The exchange between Sean and Sheena poses a series of dilemmas for the teacher. First, Ball's agenda is to have the students reflect on "what you noticed about the meeting, what you learned at the meeting." The conversation between Sean and Sheena focuses on the underlying mathematics (the nature of zero), not on the students' reflections about the meeting. Should Ball intervene to refo- cus the agenda, deferring a discussion of the content? Second, the tension in the exchange indicates that issues of ego and identity are at stake for both students. Should she intervene to avoid having Sheena feel bruised, or to defuse the ten- sion? Third, various mathematical ideas are left up in the air as the exchange between the two students comes to a close. Sean and Sheena have been using two different approaches to explore the nature of zero-Sheena, the fact that even and odd numbers alternate; Sean, the working definition. Sean's definition actually does work: after all, two zeros do add to zero. Should one or both of those points be brought up, possibly deflecting Ball's agenda even further? Or should Ball al- low things to settle, and move on? Ball does not intervene. After the exchange ends, she takes advantage of what has been said to make some meta-level points regarding the fact that difficult is- sues take a long time to work through. She then asks the class for more comments about the meeting (Line 20). Her brief exchange with Mei (Lines 21-23) is en- tirely consistent with her agenda. In Line 24 she calls on Nathan. Nathan responds, "Um, first I said that, um, zero was even, but then I guess I revised so that zero, I think, is special because, um, I - um, even numbers, like, they, they make even numbers; like two, um, two makes four, and four is an even number; and four makes eight; eight is an even number; and, um, like that. And, and go on like that, and, like, one plus one, and go on adding the same numbers with the same numbers. And so I, I think zero's special." Ball might react to this statement in various ways. Nathan's statement, like Sheena's, could support a conversation consistent with Ball's announced agenda. Nathan began by saying that he "revised" his thinking-a term in this classroom's discourse community indicating that he had reconsidered his previous opinion. 3 The class's working definition of even number was that a whole number is even if you can "make it" by putting together the same number twice. For example, 10 - 5 + 5, 50 10 is even.p. 56 Alan H. Schoenfeld 57 His statement offers Ball a direct opportunity to pursue her agenda: she could ask Nathan what caused him to change his mind. Nathan's comment could support a discussion of content, in the following way. One can rephrase one aspect of what Nathan said (but may or may not have meant), as follows: "Each even number, when doubled, makes a new even number. But zero, when doubled, does not-one gets zero again. Hence zero has a different property; it's special." This interesting argument might be pursued. Nathan's comment also provides the fodder for a content-related conversa- tion along different lines. Nathan observes that even numbers can be used to generate other even numbers, which can in turn generate other even numbers. Ball thinks (see Line 36) that Nathan has also stated the converse of the genera- tive statement-that not only do even numbers make other even numbers but that every even number is made up of a pair of (the same) even numbers. Here, classroom history becomes relevant. Ball recalls (see Line 30) that Betsy had said something similar the previous day. Pursuing students' conjectures regard- ing combinations of even and odd numbers is part of Ball's agenda for that day. Pursuing it successfully depends on understanding where students stand with regard to them. Does Nathan or Betsy believe that every even number is double another even number? Do other students? Ball might wish to know the answer to those questions. In sum, Ball faces a dilemma regarding possible reactions to Nathan's statement. She could pursue her announced agenda by responding to the part of his comment concerning the fact that he had "revised" his thinking. She could pursue the argu- ment about the special nature of zero, thereby exploring an issue of mathematical interest to the class. She could ask Nathan to clarify whether he does indeed believe that every even number is twice an even number. Pursuing any one of these options will defer, perhaps indefinitely, the consideration of the other options. Ball's choice, in Line 26, is to pursue the third, just discussed option: she asks Nathan whether he was saying that all even numbers are made up (of a pair of the same) even numbers. This consciously made choice puts her debriefing agenda on hold. In saying, "Can I ask you a question about what you just said? And then I'll ask people for more comments about the meeting," Ball signals that she is explicitly taking a detour from her intended path and that she expects to return to it once the detour is completed. For purposes of subsequent discussion, the reader should note that Ball's deci- sion in Line 26 could be questioned for a number of reasons. It might seem almost capricious. Why would Ball, who has careftilly pursued her debriefing agenda, suddenly deviate from it? Having thus far steered the discussion away from specif- ics of content and toward issues of reflection, why would she now focus on con- tent-indeed, on content that might be considered peripheral to the current discus- sion? If this decision is capricious, and if it is indicative of her style, it suggests a high level of arbitrariness in the decision making of a highly skilled teacher. If this decision is indeed capricious, the modeling enterprise might well be impossible. If this decision is not capricious, the challenge for the analytic enterprise is to showp. 57 58 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions how the decision is plausible and fits within a model of the teacher's classroom actions and decisions. The exchange with Nathan, which lasts more than 2 minutes, concludes with an interaction between Nathan and Betsy that clarifies Nathan's stance regarding Ball's question. Nathan was not claiming that every even number is the double of some other even number, but rather that even numbers generate other even num- bers by doubling.4 With this issue resolved, Ball returns to her agenda in Line 59, as she had prom- ised 2 minutes earlier in Line 26. Her statement ("I'd really like to hear from as many people as possible what comments you had or reactions you had to being in that meeting yesterday") is direct and emphatic. Sean's response in Line 60 to Ball's announcement represents yet another po- tential diversion from Ball's agenda. His comment appears to be related to the pre- vious discussion of whether every even number (in this instance, six) is made up of a pair of the same even numbers. Ball and Sean have a brief exchange in Lines 61-66. During the exchange, Ball interprets Sean's comments as signifying that six is made up of two odd (rather than even) numbers, and she publicly confirms, with Nathan, that this interpretation is consistent with the stance he enunciated in Lines 56-58. From Ball's perspective, this confirmation responds adequately to the issue raised by Sean. In Line 67 she returns to her agenda, asking for more comments about the meeting. In summary, the classroom segment on which this chapter focuses contains some very complex student-student and student-teacher interactions. Those ex- changes represent teaching dilemmas, in the ways that Ball, Lampert, and their colleagues have used the term (Ball, 1993, 1997; Ball'& Wilson, 1996; Lampert, 1985). I next turn to modeling the lesson segment. A MODEL OF BALUS DECISION MAKING DURING THE FIRST 6 MINUTES OF THE LESSON The description that follows comes in sequential phases. My main claim in this section is that Ball's actions during the first 6 minutes of instruction can be modeled by the use of one complex decision-making routine. The routine speci- fies which decisions are to be made. The decisions are then made, through cost- benefit analysis, on the basis of Ball's attributed knowledge, goals, and beliefs. In what follows I start by characterizing a simplified version of the routine and "tailoring" it to model Ball by ascribing to it some of Ball's attributed knowl- edge, goals, and beliefs.5 I next describe a more expanded version of the routine, which handles a greater range of classroom contingencies. I then provide a de- tailed analysis of the lesson segment, showing how Ball's actions during the first 6 minutes of the lesson correspond closely to five applications of the routine. I 4 One should read Nathan's statement in lines 56 and 58 as one continuous utterance. When one watches the tape, he is clearly saying, "I'm not going by every single [even] number like two, four, six, eight,...."p. 58 Alan H. Schoenfeld 59 subsequently specify the model of Ball's teaching during this lesson segment by demonstrating the way in which the routine should be employed as part of the model. I then work through the model and show how it conforms to what actually took place during the lesson. Before proceeding I should issue the standard caveats about the modeling en- terprise. First, the point should be very clear that what follows is a model of Ball's teaching during thefirst 6 minutes of the lesson. I make no claim that this part of the model captures anything like the whole of Ball's teaching, or even the whole of her teaching during this lesson. The analysis focuses on one particular routine. Like any accomplished teacher, Ball has a wide range of pedagogical routines that might be employed to different ends at different times. Instead, I am claiming is that (a) this routine is a part of her repertoire; (b) she is likely to invoke it when she wants to find out what the students think about a particular topic; and (c) her actions in the 6-minute segment of tape are entirely consistent with its implemen- tation. Similarly, the knowledge, goals, and beliefs specified in the model derived here are the knowledge, goals, and beliefs relevant to this segment of instruction. Some of them (e.g., the overarching goals A, B, and C listed in Appendix 2B and the beliefs listed in Appendix 2C) characterize aspects of Ball's teaching that I would claim are always present, but many of the other goals are "emergent" or tied to Ball's debriefing agenda; in other circumstances other goals would have highest priority. This discussion specifies only the knowledge relevant to this segment of instruction-a very small part of Ball's knowledge base. Second, I want to emphasize the distinction between the form of decision mak- ing given in the model and Ball's actual decision making. In the model, decision- making is represented by a straightforward decision procedure. I make no claim that Ball, either consciously or unconsciously, employs this or a similar decision procedure as she teaches; indeed, such is unlikely. My claim, rather, is that work- ing through the model produces decisions and actions quite similar to Ball's. Since the representations of Ball's goals, beliefs, and knowledge are as accurate as I can make them, my hope is that examining the model can produce insights into her teaching and the reasons for some of the classroom decisions she made. At the core, a simple iterative routine Here I describe the simple version of the routine that can be used to model Ball's teaching in this lesson segment. The core of the routine, in generic form, is represented as a flow chart in Figure 2.2. 5 The word attributed is important. It signifies that we as researchers assigned this knowledge and these goals and beliefs to the model on the basis of our analysis of Ball's journals, class notes, research papers, and videotapes of her teaching. As a form of research triangulation, TMG did not interview Ball about her knowledge, goals, and beliefs prior to developing the model. Part of our research strategy was to develop the model at least somewhat independently, and then to ask Ball, as a privileged informant, to comment on it. At the 1999 AERA session where we shared our analyses, she commented that the attributions appeared to be accurate. As a result of subsequent conversations, we have made some very minor changes in our analyses.p. 59 60 Modeling Teachers'Decisions Provide context and background about the topic, T. Legend Action Ask class, "What (else) can you say about T?" Call on a student. Decision Point yes 15 clarification or elaboration called for?, Ask student to clarify/ elaborate/extend response as deemed necessary no yes Would abstracting or reframing be useful?/ Highlight particular aspects of discussion for class no Do yes circumstances warrant more discussion of T? no Move to next item on agenda Figure 2.2. A simple routine for discussing a topic. Note that even if Ball's teaching could be shown to match procedure in Figure 2.2 on a line-by-line basis, this description on its own is inadequate as a charac- terization of Ball's teaching. The routine as described in the figure is far too ill-p. 60 Alan H. Schoenfeld 61 specified to serve as a model because it fails to say on what grounds the decision at each of the decision points would actually be made. In its current form, this characterization of the teaching routine is generic-it could describe an extraor- dinarily wide range of behavior. At one end of the spectrum, for example, it could be used to characterize a conceptually oriented discussion in which the teacher, by means of subtle questioning ("What ideas do you think are relevant here? What do you think they are connected with? How does what you just said fit with what we were talking about earlier?"), helps students air and develop their understand- ings of a complex topic. At the other end of the spectrum, it could be used to characterize a purely skills-oriented lesson, in which the teacher's questions and comments ("What is the first step? Good. What is the second step? No, you do it this way....") are aimed at developing rote mastery of a procedure. In other words, the major decision points in the procedure are all judgment calls. One's decision at each step depends on one's evaluation of the following: What calls for elaboration and what does not? Would summarizing, abstracting, or re- framing be useful or appropriate at this point, and if so, what should the nature of one's comments be? Has this conversation run its useful course? Such judgments, of course, are grounded in one's knowledge of the students and of the mathemat- ics, one's goals for the exchange, and one's beliefs about what is appropriate and possible. The model of a teacher must capture the teacher's judgments. Hence the generic description in Figure 2.2 becomes a model of a particular teacher only when it is tailored to the goals, beliefs, and knowledge of that teacher. The goals, beliefs, and knowledge must be specified clearly enough that one can work through the model and specify the decisions the model would make in response to classroom events as the lesson unfolds. At this point, to begin to "personalize" the model of Ball's teaching, I shall provide a preliminary description of (our attributions of) some of her knowledge, goals, and beliefs as they are relevant to Figure 2.2. Much more detail regarding all these aspects is given in Appendixes 2B (a full parsing of the lesson), 2C (a list of relevant goals), and 2D (a list of relevant beliefs), and in the narrative that follows. Once Figure 2.2 has been fleshed out, I expand on it to place the itera- tive routine it represents in the larger context of Ball's teaching. The result, a flow chart given in Figure 2.3, will be used to analyze the first 6 minutes of the lesson in detail. Goals Ball begins the January 19, 1990 class with a very explicit goal for the start of the lesson. She announces this goal to the class: "My first question is, I'd just like to hear some comments about what you thought about the meeting, what you noticed about the meeting, what you learned at the meeting, just what kinds of comments you have about yesterday's meeting." As becomes clear in the interac- tion, she wants to have students reflect on the state of their understanding and on how they learn.p. 61 62 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions These goals sit within the context of Ball's overarching goals for instruction (see Appendix 2B). Ball wants her students to become mathematical sense makers who are inclined to think through complex issues and are capable of doing so. Her classroom community is the growth medium for such thoughts and dispositions, so she wants that community to be supportive of thoughtful explorations. This goal, in turn, has specific entailments, in terms of both community and mathe- matical norms. Norms [established by the teacher] are evident for interacting on an appropriately respectful basis (for example, students say, "I disagree," not "You're wrong"). Norms have been established for making assertions. Students' assertions are expected to be grounded in reason, and justifications for them are expected to be offered. (This norm is especially employed when one student's as- sertion contradicts a claim made by another student.) Mathematical conjectures are encouraged and explored. Ball has worked to establish these norms, and they are well established by this point in the school year; an ongoing goal is to main- tain and strengthen them. In addition, as a teacher, Ball wants to understand her students' thought processes as well as she can. Beliefs Ball's beliefs about mathematics, students, teaching, learning, and classroom environment play a fundamental role in establishing her goals and shaping her choices of instructional actions. Many of these beliefs are listed in Appendix 2C. Of particular importance are Ball's beliefs that mathematics learning happens through- * participating in mathematical discourse, which includes generating mathemati- cal ideas, listening to others' mathematical ideas, and examining mathematical ideas, individually and collectively; * participating in a community that values conjecture and reasoned argumenta- tion; and * articulating one's thoughts orally and in writing. Such beliefs shape Ball's goals in clear ways. For example, the community norms that she tries to establish reflect her conceptions of what is important. They also shape her instructional decisions. In any given instructional context, Ball will act in ways that are consonant with her goals and beliefs. Indeed, some of her teaching routines have been developed as functional ways of achieving those commitments. Consider, for example, Ball's emphasis on having students learn to articulate their thoughts. One way to help students do so is to provide "scaffold- ing" for their explanations, gently nudging them toward expressing themselves with greater precision. An example of a scaffolding routine can be seen in the very first exchange of the lesson, with Sheena: Ball: Sheena, do you want to start? Sheena: I- I- I liked it [the meeting] because, well, I like talking to other classes and, and when you talk to other classes sometimes it helps.p. 62 Alan H. Schoenfeld 63 Ball: In what way? Sheena: It helps you to understand a little bit more. Ball: Was there an example of something yesterday that you understood a little bit more during the meeting? Ball's questions in this exchange provide a structure within which Sheena can clarify her own understandings and communicate them to the class. This general sequence of questions-first asking for clarification, then for an example-is a routine. Ball's choice of this routine is a reflection of her priorities, which are a reflection of her beliefs. The routine itself is part of Ball's knowledge base, dis- cussed subsequently. Knowledge A full description of Ball's relevant knowledge would require volumes. Here I sketch some of her relevant knowledge and discuss the ways in which she ac- cessed it. Ball's knowledge of the content of third-grade mathematics is not at issue. The issues for Ball are (a) how her students might engage with the mathematics that they are studying as a community of mathematical sense makers and (b) what kinds of mathematical understandings she herself must have to facilitate such en- gagement. Ball's journals contain notes on the roles of definitions, conjectures, and mathematical argumentation. The very language of classroom discourse, in- cluding such statements as "I disagree because ..." and "I revised my thinking," indicates the degree to which the class has been working on such issues. Those issues are very much at the forefront of Ball's thinking. Ball's knowledge of where the class has been and where she would like it to go play major roles in determining her orientation to the lesson. Equally important is her knowledge of the students-who is shy, who is forthcoming, who knows what? The same holds for her knowledge of classroom history. Which issues have been problematic, which are "hanging in the air," which can be drawn on as threads for an interesting conversation? Much of Ball's pedagogical knowledge is accessible in the form of routines, such as the scaffolding routine described previously. In too-simple terms, such routines are accessed when they are called for. For example, if you place high val- ue on having students learn to articulate their ideas, and if the scaffolding routine is part of your repertoire, then Sheena's opening statement (Line 2) virtually begs for its application. To couch this scenario in modeling terms, Sheena's statement is a "triggering event" whose salient characteristic is that it is a vague statement made by a student. Given Ball's belief about the need for students to learn to ar- ticulate their thoughts with precision, she gives high priority to actions that will help Sheena clarify her statement. The "ask for a clarification/ask for an example" routine fits this need nicely and is selected. The general routine is then tailored to the particular circumstances. In part 1 of the routine, Sheena is nudged towardp. 63 64 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions greater specificity when Ball responds to her comment "It helps" by asking her "in what way?" Sheena's response completes part 1, setting the stage for part 2, in which Ball asks for an example. Other relevant knowledge is context-specific. For example, a student's comment such as "I don't understand" could, in the abstract, engender responses that range from "it's in your notes" to "I'll discuss this with you after class" to "let's work through this now." The choice of response will depend partly on context and con- straints, for example, do we have time to explore this issue? The choice will de- pend on the teacher's sense of the class. Are other students likely to be confused? Would a discussion help? The decision will depend on the teacher's knowledge of the class history and goals. How does the student's comment tie into previous conversations? Can a response help lay the foundation for planned activities? It will also depend, fundamentally, on the teacher's knowledge of the student. Does the student often make such comments, or is this statement a rare expression of confusion? Is the student capable of dealing with a stern response, or is a "kid gloves" response appropriate? In short, the teacher's response depends on both general and very specific knowledge. Despite the caveat in the previous sentence, an understanding of a teacher's general goals and beliefs does allow one to begin to specify the ways in which the routine described in Figure 2.2 could be used to model the teacher's actions and decisions. For example, one does not need much knowledge of Ball's teaching to assert that under typical conditions, she will not respond to a student's comment with evaluative statements of the type "that's right" or "that's wrong." Hence one can assign such statements extremely low response probabilities in the model. By contrast, Ball's beliefs and goals will, under typical conditions, lead her to respond to vague statements in particular ways. She is likely to try to help students articu- late their thinking more precisely. Moreover, in certain conditions, she is likely to use a scaffolding routine of the type described previously. Hence, such responses can be built into the model. By doing so-by assigning each plausible response the probability that Ball would react in that way in that kind of circumstance-one can constrain the space of responses to the routine in Figure 2.2 to produce a rough approximation of the character of Ball's teaching. A 'flexible, interruptable" routine that includes debriefing at its core The routine represented in Figure 2.2 is idealized. It represents classroom dis- cussions as one might like them to happen, not necessarily as they do. In Figure 2.2 all the students' responses are implicitly aligned with the teacher's agenda, and the teacher works with those responses. In real classrooms, students do not always respond with comments that are aligned with the teacher's agenda. In such in- stances, the teacher has to decide how to respond. Sometimes a student's comment raises an issue that the teacher judges to be a candidate for classroom discussion. (Recall, for instance, the discussion of Example 2 in the section titled "The struc- ture of the models we employ.") In that circumstance, the teacher needs to decide whether to follow up on the student's comment. If yes, the teacher must decidep. 64 Alan H. Schoenfeld 65 when and how to do so. Sometimes a student's comment points in directions that the teacher would prefer not to pursue. If so, the teacher moves to have the class return to the intended agenda. Any model of a classroom routine must allow for such contingencies. Figure 2.3 represents an expansion of Figure 2.2 with such properties. The main difference between Figures 2.2 and 2.3 is a branch point in Figure 2.3 (the diamond labeled [Dl]) that allows for a variety of options after a student has made a comment. This branch point represents the decision discussed in the previous paragraph. If the student's remark is in line with the teacher's agenda, then [DlI] = "no" and the teacher proceeds to [D3]. From that point on, the teacher's interaction with the stu- dent is exactly as in Figure 2.2. If, however, the students' comment does raise other issues ([DlI] = "yes"), the teacher needs to decide whether now is the time to pursue that issue. The choice is made at decision point [D2]. If [D2] = "yes," the class then works through the issue and (presuming a continuation of the main line of discus- sion is warranted) the teacher returns to the main topic. If [D2] = "no," the teacher moves to close off the discussion and return directly to the main agenda. I claim that the routine outlined in Figure 2.3-supplemented with a great deal of detail regarding Ball's knowledge, goals, and beliefs-can be used to represent the first 6 minutes of her January 19, 1990, class with great fidelity. More specifi- cally, I claim that Lines 1-67 of the transcript can be represented as five iterations of the routine outlined in Figure 2.3: providing context and background in Line 1, working through the "[DlI] = no" pathway in Lines 2-8, working through the "[DlI] = yes" pathway in Lines 9-20[C], working through the "[DlI] = no" pathway in Lines 20[D]-23, working through the "[DlI] = yes" pathway in Lines 24-58, working through the "[DlI] = yes" pathway in Lines 59-66, and beginning yet another iteration of the routine in Line 67. The analysis proceeds as follows. I first identify the main break points in the lesson segment. Doing so results in a first-level parsing of the lesson segment, which was previewed in the discussion of Figure 2.1. Each of the episodes in the first-level parsing is then analyzed in detail. Particular attention is given to deci- sions at branch points. The analysis indicates that Ball's choices, although made spontaneously during the flow of classroom events, can also be seen as principled and rational, in the sense that they represent choices that are highly consistent with her beliefs, and in the service of her high-priority goals. A detailed analysis of the lesson segment The analyses in this section and the next are keyed to the transcript, which is given in easy-to-read form in the Appendix 1 of this volume. The transcript also appears as the leftmost column of the parsing given in Appendix 2A. Appendixp. 65 66 Modeling Teachers'Decisions [Al] Provide context and background about the topic, T. Legend Action Decision Point [A2] Ask class, "What (else) can you say about T?" Call on a student. [DI] [D2] [A3] yes yes Have the class work through the issues. Should these issues be pursued? Does the response raise other issues? no no [A4] Seek closure. Is [A5] clarification yes or elaboration called for/ [D3] IAsk student to elaborate/extend response as deemed necessary no [D4] [A6] yes Does the response \raise other issues? Highlight particular aspects of discussion for class no D5] circumstances Do yes warrant more discussion of T? [A7] no Move to next item on agenda. Figure 2.3. A flexible, interruptable routine for discussing a topic.p. 66 Alan H. Schoenfeld 67 2A presents a relatively complete analytic representation of the first 6 minutes of the lesson. Unpacking the detail in Appendix 2A calls for a fair amount of cross- referencing with regard to goals, beliefs, and decision making. The goal traces in Appendix 2A indicate the intensity of Ball's overarching goals (A, B, and C), major content goals (D and E), and local goals (F through J) at any time. Descriptions of goals A through J are given in Appendix 2B. The belief traces in Appendix 2A indicate the intensity of Ball's beliefs about learning (Ll through L6), teaching (Tl through 4), students (S1 through S4), classroom environments (Cl through C5), and mathematics (M1 through M3). Descriptions of those beliefs are given in Ap- pendix 2C. The rightmost column of Appendix 2A, "decision making," summariz- es the decisions Ball makes and also gives the grounds for those decisions. Specific decisions are keyed to the decision points [DlI] through [D5] in Figure 2.3. As noted in the foregoing, my goal is to show that Lines 1-67 of the transcript represent five "tours" through Figure 2.3. Readers who want to follow the ar- gument on a line-by line basis may find it useful to make copies of Figure 2.3 and Appendixes 2A, 2B and 2C, and lay them out in a way that facilitates cross- referencing. I begin with a first-level parsing of the lesson segment. The general idea behind lesson parsing has been discussed: the subepisodes of any episode of instruction are chosen to be maximal subunits of that episode that cohere on phenomenologi- cal grounds. In more detail, the rules for parsing are the following: a. When an episode is decomposed into subepisodes, each subepisode must cohere along some well-defined dimension, which may be the topic of discus- sion, the nature of the interactions (whole-class discussion versus seatwork versus individual presentations), or, at fine levels of grain size, turn-taking in conversation. b. Although subepisodes of a given episode are not required to be of the same length (and may indeed differ substantially in length), they must be at the same grain size. c. Distinguishing features must be evident between adjacent subepisodes. d. Decomposition proceeds one level at a time, so that the subepisodes at the "next" level of parsing of any episode are the largest subepisodes of that episode that possess properties a, b, and c. The first-order parsing of the lesson segment in question is straightforward. The first 6 minutes of the lesson split naturally into five episodes, as follows. First episode. Ball begins (Line 1) by establishing the context for the discus- sion. Her exchange with Sheena in Lines 2-8, dealing with Sheena's reaction to the previous day's class, is focused and coherent. Ball's "Okay" in Line 8 effec- tively announces that that episode has come to a close. Second episode. Ball's question "Other people's comments?" opens the episode. Sean's response begins a (rather tense) exchange between him and Sheena, which lasts through Line 19 of the transcript. Ball's comments [A] through [C] in Line 20 bring closure to that conversation.p. 67 68 Modeling Teachers'Decisions Third episode. Ball once again invites comments in Line 20, and Mei responds. The brief exchange with Mei in Lines 21-23 is self-contained. Fourth episode. In Line 24 Ball requests additional comments. Nathan responds in Line 25. The class discusses issues raised by his response all the way through Line 58. Fifth episode. Ball reiterates her agenda in Line 59. Sean responds with a some- what cryptic comment about six being made up both of two things (two threes) and of three things (three twos). Ball interacts with Sean and Nathan about this idea in Lines 60-66. Her invitation to the class in Line 67 ("Other people's com- ments?") indicates that the exchange with Sean and Nathan has come to a close. Little more needs to be said about this decomposition. Each of the episodes co- heres. Each is, in essence, the "working through" of a comment made by a student. In that way all the episodes are at the same grain size, even though some of them are much longer than others. Each episode is clearly distinguished from its prede- cessor. And, no coherent decomposition with fewer episodes appears to exist. Context6 The story of January 19, 1990, begins before the beginning--of the lesson, that is. Ball enters the classroom that day with knowledge of what has preceded that day's lesson, and with a particular set of goals, beliefs, and action plans. Appendix 2B provides a list of some of Ball's relevant goals during the lesson. Three types of goals are identified in Appendix 2B. Ball's overarching goals are always present at some level of activation. If particular classroom events occur, they may be "triggered" and take on very high priority. The major content and learning goals for this lesson segment establish Ball's orientation to the instruc- tion in which she is about to engage. As noted in Section 2, Ball begins the class with a debriefing agenda. She wants to hear the students' reactions to the previous day's class session. Ball is specifically concerned with issues at the meta-level: she wants to orient the classroom conversation to issues of how the students under- stand their own mathematical learning and understanding. She will, however, let the discussion take its course as long as that course is consistent with other high- priority goals. The local goals identified in Appendix 2B are emergent. Such goals are triggered by specific student comments (e.g., a vague statement by a student triggers a "clarification" goal and results in the implementation of a clarification routine). Ball's goals are fundamentally related to her beliefs about learning, teaching, and mathematics. Relevant beliefs are highlighted in Appendix 2C. They will be invoked as needed in the analysis that follows. So will relevant knowledge of stu- dents, curriculum, and classroom history. 6 For purposes of readability, the description in this section is given in the form of a narrative, including descriptive statements of the type "Ball has the following goals and/or beliefs." All such claims are assertions and should be seen as such. They should be interpreted as follows: "In this analy- sis, I attribute the following goals and/or beliefs to Ball." Such attributions are grounded in analyses of Ball's journals and annotated class logs as well as videotapes of her lessons.p. 68 Alan H. Schoenfeld 69 Analysis of Episode 1 After some preliminaries, Ball begins the lesson (Line 1 of the transcript) by es- tablishing the context for the day's discussion (item [Al] of Figure 2.3) and calling on Sheena (item [A2]). Sheena's response in Line 2, " when you talk to other classes, sometimes it helps," is directly in line with Ball's agenda. The response does not raise other issues, so in terms of Figure 2.3, [Dl] = "no." Sheena's re- sponse is vague, however; hence [D3] = "yes." The vague response activates Ball's clarification routine, represented by the subloop through [A5]. In Line 3, Ball provides a general prompt, "In what way?" Sheena's response in Line 4, "It helps you to understand a little bit more," is more specific, but more remains to be said. Thus [D3] = "yes" once again; in response, Ball asks (Line 5) for an example. The example Sheena gives in response (Line 6) is fully responsive to Ball's question ([D3] = "no"), bringing that subloop to a close. However, Sheena's response does provide the opportunity for Ball to make a meta-level point to the class ([D4] = "yes") in summary of what Sheena has said. Ball does so in Line 7 (Action [A6]). Then, since the debriefing activity has just gotten under way, Ball acts to continue it ([D5] -"yes"). Lines 1-8 of the transcript can thus be seen as one pass through the routine de- scribed in Figure 2.3. This pass is represented schematically in Figure 2.4. Detail regarding the ways that goals, beliefs, and actions fit together is given in Appendix 2A. Figure 2.4. A schematic representation of the flow of lines 1-8 of the lesson transcript. Analysis of Episode 2 Events take a different turn in Episode 2. In Line 9 Ball once again begins the iterative routine with a request for comments. She calls on Sean.p. 69 70 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions Sean does not discuss his reaction to the previous day's meeting (Ball's agenda), but instead addresses a content-related question directly to Sheena. His question in Line 9 implicitly uses a working definition for even numbers that the class has developed: an even number is always "made up" of two equal numbers. If zero is even, asks Sean, what two numbers make it up? Sheena responds substantively to Sean, although her response is at cross-purposes to his. In Line 14 she offers an argument that she had heard the previous day: even and odd numbers alternate, and zero lies between the two odd numbers -1 and +1, so it has to be even. Sean pushes: does it have to be even? Sheena backpedals in Lines 16 and 18, saying it could be even but doesn't have to be, at which point Sean notes (Line 19) that she had said earlier that it must be. The issue is left hanging, with some tension in the air. Sheena returns to her seat. In Lines 20A through 20C, Ball comments on the difficulty of such discussions and notes that even the fourth graders with whom they had met the previous day have not resolved the issue. In Lines 20D through 20G, Ball announces an explicit return to her debriefing agenda and calls on Mei. The foregoing exchange, which lasts a little over a minute, raises some very interesting questions. For example, why did Ball not declare Sean's comment off limits, since it was not in line with her agenda? Why did she not intervene during the conversation between Sean and Sheena? Why did she not resolve the content issue at the end of their discussion? The answers to these questions have to do with Ball's beliefs and practices, and with her long-term goals for instruction. Sean's comment to Sheena, although fo- cused on content and thus not in line with Ball's short-term meta-level agenda, is very much in line with a number of Ball's beliefs and goals for her students. Ball has worked very hard to shape her classroom so that it functions as a pro- ductive mathematical discourse community, in which students engage in mathe- matical sense making. Her students have learned to probe one another's ideas with respect, and to justify their own statements on mathematical grounds. Ball wants the students to see the mathematics as making sense, not to accept it because "the teacher says so." (Note learning beliefs LlI through L6 in Appendix 2C.) Of course, the teacher is a major catalyst for sense-making discussions-especially early in the year, when the students have not learned to carry on respectful mathematical conversations. However, when a conversation is both respectful and mathemati- cally substantive, Ball will tend to step back and let it run its course. She believes that her students need to grapple with complex ideas. Giving "the answer" prema- turely can deprive students of the opportunity to do sense making on their own, and perhaps even of the confidence that they can do it. She is, of course, mindful and attentive as the students conduct their conversation; she is ready to intervene if the discussion takes a turn that requires it. Her silence during the exchange between Sean and Sheena does not indicate passive withdrawal. Rather, Ball is monitoring the conversation both because intervention may become necessary and because the conversation may provide grist for later discussion or reflection. In terms of the model, the exchange between Sean and Sheena that begins inp. 70 Alan H. Schoenfeld 71 Lines 10 through 14 of the transcript results in the increased activation of a num- ber of Ball's high-priority beliefs: * L4 and L5, about the value of learning through exchanges of the type in which Sean and Sheena are engaged; * T I, T3, and T4, about the importance of providing opportunities for students to think on their own and to express their ideas; * S1 and S4, about students' feeling free to express themselves appropriately (Sean's comment is made using special classroom language that signals a re- spectful demurral: "I disagree because..."); * Cl, C2, C3, C4, and C5, about the fact that the classroom environment should allow room for exchanges like the one taking place; and * M l, M2, and M3, in that Sean and Sheena are engaging in real mathematics. Because this constellation of beliefs is at a high level of activation, Goal H is set at a very high level of activation, and Ball goes into "wait and watch mode." As Ball monitors the conversation, nothing in the interaction exceeds her threshold for intervention, so she allows the conversation to run its course. Finally, I observe that Lines 9-20C represent a second iteration of the routine outlined in Figure 2.3. Ball calls on Sean in Line 9. Sean's comment to Sheena in Line 10, diverting the conversation from Ball's reflective agenda, represents a move along the [Dl] = "yes" pathway. Ball's decision to let the conversation between Sean and Sheena play out signifies a [D2] = "yes" decision. The conver- sation itself, in Lines 10-19, represents action A4. In Lines 20A-20C Ball brings the conversation to a gentle close. Lines 20D through 20F represent an attempt to return to her original agenda ([D5] = "yes"). Episode 2 is represented schematically in Figure 2.5. Detail is once again given in Appendix 2A. Figure 2.5. A schematic representation of the flow of lines 9-20C of the lesson transcriptp. 71 72 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions Analysis of Episode 3 Episode 3 is nearly as straightforward as a classroom episode can be. Ball re- introduces her agenda in Lines 20D-20F, calling on Mei in Line 20G (action [A2]). Mei's remark in Line 21, "I thought that zero was always going to be a even number, but from the meeting I sort of got mixed up because I heard other ideas I agree with, and now I don't know which one I should agree with," is right on target ([D3] = "no"). Ball's question in Line 22, "So what are you going to do about that?" is a request for elaboration (action [A5]). Mei's response in Line 23, "I'm going to listen more to the discussion and find out." is at the meta-level and does not require further comment; hence [D4] = "no." The exchange is now roll- ing smoothly, and Ball continues her debriefing agenda ([D5] = "yes") by asking, "Other people?" The schematic representation of Episode 3 is given in Figure 2.6. Figure 2.6. A schematic representation of the flow of lines 20D-24 of the lesson transcript. Analysis of Episode 4 As noted in Section 3, Episode 4 represents a significant challenge for analysis. In Line 25 Nathan announces that he has "revised" his thinking, and he provides a reason for that change of mind. Although his comment is mathematical ("I think zero's special") rather than meta-mathematical (dealing with his impressions of the meeting), it is consistent with Ball's announced agenda and provides the raw material for a conversation directly in line with it. At this point Ball deliberately deflects the conversation from her announced agenda. In Lines 26A-B ("Can I ask you a question about what you just said? And then I'll ask people for more comments about the meeting"), she announces thatp. 72 Alan H. Schoenfeld 73 she is putting her agenda on hold and will return to it later. Then, over the course of Lines 26 though 43, Ball frames and asks the following question: is Nathan claiming or conjecturing that every even number is twice another even number? Clarifying Nathan's answer to this question (which, for purposes of easy reference, I shall refer to as the "evenness conjecture") occupies Ball and the class through item 58. This episode lasts for slightly more than two and a half minutes. Asking Nathan whether he believes the evenness conjecture is a strikingly un- usual decision. Ball forsakes (at least temporarily) an agenda that she has worked hard to establish. Moreover, in doing so she does not address the main mathe- matical content of Nathan's statement. Nathan's major claim in Line 25 is that the number zero is "special." In making that claim, he picks up the line of conversa- tion established by the other students. Sheena had said that she thought zero was even. Sean had challenged her assertion (or at least its justification), and Mei had said she was confused about the issue. Now Nathan joins the fray. Yet Ball does not address this central mathematical point. Rather, she focuses on part of his supporting argument, the fact that that adding a pair of (the same) even numbers results in another even number. The issue at hand is whether this unusual move on Ball's part has a reasonable explanation. Ball's decision to ask Nathan about the evenness conjecture is explic- it and announced, so it cannot be dismissed as being "random." To explain Ball's teaching in this episode in terms of the model, one must show that her decision to determine the strength of Nathan's belief in the evenness conjecture is consistent with her knowledge, beliefs, and goals. Indeed, one must show that it is an entirely justifiable choice, in terms of the kind of cost-benefit analysis that lies at the core of the model's decision making. Here, in brief, is that argument. Classroom history and her intended course of action play a fundamental role in shaping Ball's priorities. Ball's class has been exploring the properties of even and odd numbers. In an earlier class Betsy had conjectured that the sum of an odd number of odd numbers is odd, and that the sum of an even number of odd num- bers is even (Ball, January 16, 1990). As noted in Section 2, Ball wanted to devote a large part of the January 19 lesson to the pursuit of those ideas. Ball has a number of reasons for wanting to know whether Nathan and Betsy (or other students) believe the evenness conjecture to be true. She has a deep and abid- ing interest in making sense of her students' understandings-in seeing how they put ideas together and how ideas take shape for them. Hence she is predisposed to explore her students' understandings when circumstances permit. In addition, Ball is trying to shape her classroom community into a productive mathematical com- munity. Mathematical communities produce results that are grounded in shared understandings. Ball is concerned with the question of whether the class members have a shared foundation for the discussions to follow. Consider, for example, this note in her January 16, 1990, class log: "One interesting dimension of this issue has to do with the centrality and sig- nificance of definition in a mathematical community. If Ofala believes, using her definition of even and odd numbers, that three is even, while someone else thinksp. 73 74 Modeling Teachers'Decisions it's odd, then discussing conjectures about what happens when you add an odd number to an even number are not likely to be easy, even feasible." Hence Ball needs to know what her students believe about the evenness conjec- ture if they are to be working on related conjectures later in the day. Nathan's com- ment in Line 25 raises for Ball the issue of the evenness conjecture and the role it has played in recent conversations. The question of who believes in the conjecture has been hanging in the air. With this concern as background, let us consider some of Ball's options after Nathan makes his comment in Line 25. The question is, given Ball's beliefs and goals, and the options she might consider, which of those options might result as plausible choices on the basis of a cost-benefit analysis? Here are what appear to be the three most plausible options at this point: * Option 1: Let Nathan's observation pass and reorient the class to her agenda of commenting on the previous day's meeting. This, in essence, is how Ball responded to the Sean-Sheena exchange. * Option 2: Pursue the central mathematical issue raised by Nathan: whether zero is even, odd, or "special." * Option 3: Ask Nathan and Betsy whether they believe that the evenness conjec- ture is true. The costs and benefits of pursuing Option 1 are as follows. On the plus side is lesson continuity via the continued pursuit of Ball's highest priority goal at this point, having the students reflect on the meeting. On the minus side, Ball does not get to clarify the nature of Nathan and Betsy's understandings, which would help lay the foundation for the main focus of the day's lesson. Less important but also on the minus side, the class does not get to pursue the mathematics involved in the exchange (the nature of zero). On balance, the pluses outweigh the minuses. This choice is a plausible option, which one might well expect to be the pathway of choice. The costs and benefits of pursuing Option 2 are as follows. On the plus side, the nature of zero is a very important issue for this mathematical community. It had surfaced the previous day and (despite Ball's attempts to focus discussion at the meta-level) had already been addressed by Sheena, Sean, Mei, and Nathan. That this issue will almost certainly be pursued by the class at some point. On the minus side, the very importance of the issue guarantees that the discussion of whether zero is even, odd, or special will be protracted. Once the class focuses its attention on that topic, other topics are almost certain to fall by the wayside. Addressing that issue now will most likely put an end to Ball's current attempts to debrief her students about the meeting. On balance, those costs are too high. Ball is not yet prepared to let go of the debriefing agenda. This option will not be pursued. The costs and benefits of pursuing Option 3 are as follows. On the plus side are many of the considerations mentioned above. Ball gets to clarify the naturep. 74 Alan H. Schoenfeld 75 of Nathan's and Betsy's beliefs regarding the evenness conjecture7. This issue is important on its own (Ball wants to understand her students' understandings) and because knowing what her students believe is essential for later classroom discus- sions-it establishes a firmer grounding for issues that she intends to pursue later in the lesson. On the minus side, the class does not get to pursue the mathematical issue that is obviously high on its agenda, the nature of zero. In addition, focus- ing on the evenness conjecture represents a potentially serious disruption of her debriefing agenda. If the students get involved in something else, can she bring them back to it? A primary consideration, then, is just how disruptive the pursuit of Option 3 might be to her debriefing agenda. Here is where Ball's move to find out what Nathan and Betsy think-but not to pursue the mathematics involved- makes a big difference. In posing a question of the type "I just want to clarify something for a second. Do you believe that X is true?" Ball demonstrates her intention to get a quick answer and then to return to her debriefing agenda. In sum, pursuing Option 3 is likely to result in some benefits (understanding where Nathan and Betsy stand on an issue and laying the groundwork for later work) at reasonably contained costs (the short-term disruption of the debriefing agenda). Given Ball's knowledge, goals, and beliefs, this tactic is a reasonable, although not obvious, choice. As noted earlier in this paper, I make no claim that Ball's choice of Option 3 was consciously made along the lines outlined in the foregoing-teachers hardly have the time to engage consciously in the kinds of cost-benefit analysis discussed here. One can quite reasonably assert, however, that Ball was aware of the risks of pursuing the evenness conjecture, and that she believed that exercising Option 3 instead would enable her to return to her debriefing agenda. After all, in Line 26 she signaled her priorities by announcing that their exchange would be short ("Can I ask you a question about what you just said?") and that the debriefing was still her highest priority item ("And then I'll ask people for more comments about the meeting"). In sum, Ball's decision in Line 26 is entirely consistent with a model that pro- ceeds on a cost-benefit basis. Let us continue with a complete trace of Episode 4. Nathan's statement in Line 25 triggers for Ball a number of issues related to her plans for the main substance of the day's lesson. Thus, it represents passage through the [D1] = "yes" decision point in Figure 2.3. Specifically in terms of the model, Nathan's statement results in the increased activation of beliefs Ll, T2, C3, and C5, and of goals C and J. On that basis Ball decides to pursue Nathan's under- standing of the evenness conjecture ([D2] = "yes"). In Lines 26-28 she articulates the question at hand. Starting in Line 30 (consistent with the high activation of goals C, I, and J), she brings Betsy into the conversation. She begins in Line 34 to clarify the evenness conjecture. She does so in interaction with Nathan (and with some sidebar comments by other students) in Lines 34, 39, 41, and 43. 7 A very important point to note is that Ball's goal for this exchange is only to clarify for herself whether Nathan and Betsy believe that the evenness conjecture is true. She is not planning to actually discuss the truth of the conjecture at this point. Such a discussion might well be time-consuming.p. 75 76 Modeling Teachers'Decisions In Line 45 Betsy, addressing Nathan, raises the case of six-a counterexample to the evenness conjecture. At this point the class is functioning as a mathematical community once again, discussing an issue of mathematical substance. Much as in the Sean-Sheena exchange that took place in Lines 10-14, the beliefs L4, L5, Ti, T3, T4, S1, S4, Ci-C5, and Mi-M3 are activated, along with Goal H. Ball goes into active monitoring mode. In Line 50 Betsy completes her argument. She has shown that six, which is even, is twice an odd number (three) and not twice an even number. That fact means that the evenness conjecture cannot be true. The ensuing exchange between Nathan and Betsy (with some interleaved com- ments from Sean) results in Nathan's clarification (or possible revision) of his stance. Nathan says, in essence, that you can keep building larger and larger even numbers if you start with two, double it, double the result, and so on. Betsy's ob- servation about six is taken into account in Nathan's final summation, which takes place over Lines 56 and 58: "Yeah, I'm not going by every single number. Like, two, four, six, eight." This statement refutes the evenness conjecture publicly, and brings Episode 4 to its conclusion. Before proceeding with the analysis of Episode 5, 1 want to highlight two major issues raised by the events in Episode 4. First, as discussed previously, Ball's deci- sion to do a "status check" regarding Nathan and Betsy's belief in the evenness conjecture has been shown to be an entirely plausible'action that is consistent with her goals, beliefs, and knowledge. Second great consistency is evident in Ball's decisions and actions-and, I claim, in the underlying set of goals and beliefs that generate them. In many ways, the exchange between Betsy and Nathan that takes place in Lines 45 through 58 is reminiscent of the exchange between Sean and Sheena in Lines 10 through 19. In both instances, a student challenges another student's statement. The challenge is respectful and thus within the social norms that Ball wants to encourage and maintain. The challenging student provides a solid mathematical warrant for his or her statement, so his or her comment is within the mathematical norms that Ball wants to encourage and maintain. I claim that in both exchang- es, essentially the same set of beliefs regarding students, teaching, learning, and mathematics gets increased activation (see Aguirre & Speer, 2000, for a discussion of "belief bundles"). This outcome results in the same set of goals being highly activated, and thus in the selection of the same action plan-a "wait and watch" monitoring routine. Finally, in both instances, when the conversation draws to a close on its own, Ball returns the discussion to her debriefing agenda. The schematic representation of Episode 4 is given in Figure 2.7. Detail is once again given in Appendix 2A. Analysis of Episode 5 In Line 59 Ball once again invites students to comment on the previous day's class (step Al of the routine in Figure 2.3). Sean responds in Line 60. Sean was beginning to explore out loud the idea that the number six is both even and odd.p. 76 Alan H. Schoenfeld 77 Figure 2.7. A schematic representation of the flow of lines 25-58 of the lesson transcript. His idea was that six is even because it is made up of two sets that are the same size (two threes), and that it is odd because it is made up of an odd number of sets that are the same size (three twos).8 However, Sean's statement was ambiguous, and Ball did not hear it that way. Ball writes that she thought Sean's comment was connected with the discussion that had just come to a close. "I thought that Sean's point was that two odd numbers could also make an even number. I assumed that we could now move on with our discussion of the meeting and then move from there to what we were supposed to be working on today" (Ball, undated, page 1). That is, Ball heard Sean's comment about two threes making six in the context of the previous exchange over the evenness conjecture. With this understanding she confirmed with Sean that six is twice an odd number (Line 63) and then (Line 65) that this statement meshed with Nathan's: some but not all even numbers are made up of a pair of even numbers. Sean's comments in Lines 60-62 and Ball's decision in Line 63 to clarify Sean's statement and relate it to the previous conversation represent passage through the [D I] = "yes" pathway (as he says himself, Sean's comment is not about the meet- ing) and then the [D2] = "no" pathway in Figure 2.3. Her subsequent request for comments represents passage through the [D5] = "yes" pathway. Episode 5 thus 8 Sean's idea may seem strange to readers who are not familiar with the story of this day's les- son-after all, we know that any whole number must be either even or odd. But for a student who is just starting to make sense of odd and even numbers, that point is not necessarily clear. For example, one can define squares and cubes. Some squares, such as 64, are also cubes. Could something similar not happen with even and odd numbers? A student might know that a number such as six is even but wonder why it could not be odd too. At this point the class has developed a clear working definition of even: even numbers are "made up" of two numbers that are the same size. The class does not have a firm working definition of odd. Sean is exploring the idea that an odd number is something made up of three numbers that are the same size.p. 77 78 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions represents a fifth tour of Figure 2.3. This path is represented in schematic form in Figure 2.8. Figure 2.8. A schematic representation of the flow of lines 59-67 of the lesson transcript. From a description to a model As discussed in Section 2.2, a representation of a lesson like the one given in Appendix 2A can be read in two ways. Reading from left to right, one has the kernel of a descriptive story such as the one told in the preceding section. The lesson segment as it unfolds is parsed iteratively into smaller episodes, and the goals and beliefs that are highly activated during each episode are identified. If, however, one reads Appendix 2A from the middle on-identifying the knowl- edge, goals, and beliefs that are at high levels of activation, then implementing a decision-making mechanism that selects a course of action to achieve the high- priority goals-one then has the kernel of a model. In this section I work through Appendix 2A in that way, showing how it can be used to model Ball's teaching. The fundamental shift between the previous section and this one is as follows. In the previous section I made the following claim: "Here is what Ball did, and here is a plausible explanation of why she did it." In this section I make the following claim: "Here is a model whose initial state consists of a set of beliefs, goals, and knowledge that I believe represents (some of) Ball's beliefs, goals, and knowledge when she taught the lesson on January 19, 1990. The model makes its decisions on a cost-benefit basis, as previously described. When one works through the model, it produces decisions that are remarkably consistent with those made by Ball." Entailments of this claim are explored in the "Discussion" section. I shall now indicate how the model represented in Appendix 2A would simulate Ball's decision making. For ease of reference, I shall call the model MB.p. 78 Alan H. Schoenfeld 79 Before the simulation begins, MB is "primed" with the beliefs and goals listed in Appendices 2C and 2B, respectively. Corresponding to those beliefs and goals (specifically the very high activation level of goals D and E and the relatively high activation of beliefs L3, L4, L6, TI-T4, C5, S1, and S2), MB selects and begins to implement the routine in Figure 2.3. This action results in Line 1 of the transcript, in which MB sets the stage for the discussion and calls on a student. Sheena's response, in Line 2, is in the general ballpark ([DlI] = "no") but vague ([D2] = "yes"), thereby causing MB to implement its "clarify through scaffolding" routine, which is implemented in Lines 3 (ask for clarification) and 5 (ask for an ex- ample). Sheena's comment in Line 6 is deemed appropriate for abstraction ([D4] = "yes"), so MB does so in Line 7. Given that the debriefing discussion has just be- gun, [D2] = "yes," MB embarks on the next iteration of the routine in Line 9. Sean's comment to Sheena in Line 10 addresses a content issue rather than the reflective agenda ([Dl] = "yes"). It is, however, respectful and mathematically substantive. The exchange triggers the increased activation of beliefs L4, L5, TI, T3, T4, Si, S4, Cl-C5, and M1-M3; thus [D2] = "yes." Goals D and E remain active, but lowered in priority for the time being, and Goal H is very strongly acti- vated. As a result, MB implements a "monitor with the possibility of intervention" routine, which remains in place through the end of Line 19. When the exchange between Sean and Sheena is completed, MB makes a closing comment in Lines 20A-C. At that point, Goal H is deactivated and the set of beliefs and goals that were active at Line 1 are once again given high levels of activation. [D5] = "yes," and in Line 20D MB begins another iteration of the routine. Mei's response in Line 20 is in line with MB's agenda ([DlI] = "no"). Her com- ment about being confused ([D3] = "yes") raises a natural question, which MB asks in Line 22. Mei's response in Line 23 is crystal clear, needing no further elaboration ([D4] = "no"). The reflective agenda is going well, so [D5] = "yes"; MB, in Line 24, asks for more comments. Once again, the beliefs and goals that accompany the start of the routine (goals D and E and beliefs L3, L4, L6, Ti-T4, C5, S 1, and S2) are given strong activation. Nathan's response in Line 25 boosts the activation levels of beliefs Li, T2, C3, and C5; concomitantly, Goal J receives very strong activation. Here at least three alternative pathways through Figure 2.3 are plausible. A central part of Nathan's assertion concerns the "special" nature of 0, for which he gives a plausible explana- tion. This statement might be considered potentially "on target" ([D I] = "no"), and MB might ask a clarifying question aimed at meta-level issues-for example, "was there something in yesterday's conversation that led you to think this way?" Alter- natively, since Nathan's comment focuses on content instead of addressing Ball's meta-level agenda, it might be considered off-target ([DlI] = "yes"). MB might decide that the content issue should not be pursued ([D2] = "no") and consequently would seek closure (step [A4]) and begin the routine once again. Or, given the very strong activation of Goal J, the activation of goals B and C, and the assessment that the debriefing agenda could withstand a short-term detour, MB might ask Nathan for clarification regarding his view of the evenness conjecture. All three of thesep. 79 80 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions pathways are plausible, and none of them is overwhelmingly strong in terms of activation or cost-benefit analysis. Any of these might be chosen in one run of the model. (In multiple runs, each would be chosen some of the time.) If MB chose to pursue either of the first two options mentioned in the forego- ing-leading Nathan to a meta-level conversation or deciding not to pursue the mathematical content of his remark-one could imagine running out the tour of Figure 2.3 in straightforward ways. If, as Ball did, MB decides to pursue Na- than's understanding of the evenness conjecture, MB's question takes us through Line 28. Betsy had made a conjecture similar to the evenness conjecture, and the success of discussions planned for later in the lesson might depend on whether Nathan, Betsy, and perhaps some other students believe the conjecture to be true. Thus goals I and J are activated. MB acts to bring Betsy into the conversation in Lines 3-32, and in Lines 34-43 to clarify the issue for all the students (cf. Goals G and J). The context of discussion has shifted to the evenness conjecture. Betsy's com- ment in Line 45 is right on target: it challenges Nathan respectfully and on mathe- matical grounds. Beliefs L4, L5, T1, T3, T4, S1, S4, Cl-C5, and MI'M3 are activated. Goal J remains activated, and Goal H is given a very strong level of activation. MB once again implements a "monitor with the possibility of interven- tion" routine, which remains in place through the end of Line 58. MB then returns to step A2 of the routine, asking in Line 59 for more comments about the meeting. Sean's comment is not about the debriefing agenda; hence [D I1] = "yes." How MB responds to Sean's comment in Line 60 depends on what under- standings it has. If MB is given Ball's understanding at the moment, that Sean is making a comment related to the discussion of the evenness conjecture, then [D2] = "no:" the topic has been discussed at adequate length and Sean's comment does not add to what has been said. MB notes that Sean's statement (six is made up of two threes, which are odd) is consistent with Nathan's comment that some but not all even numbers are made up of a pair of the same even numbers. This comment addresses (MB's understanding of) Sean's comment. With Sean's comment ad- dressed, MB decides to continue the debriefing agenda ([D5] = "yes) and asks for more comments in Line 67. Thus ends one virtual run of MB. Having worked through the model, we need to compare MB's decisions with those made by Ball. When one examines the two sets of decisions, the correspon- dence between the model's and Ball's decisions is questionable in two places. The first is in response to Nathan's comment in Line 25. As indicated previously, three paths of action are plausible. MB's cost-benefit analysis does not does settle clearly on any of them. Hence MB's decision making does not necessarily repli- cate what Ball actually did. A problem does not necessarily exist here. One might reasonably judge that if Ball had faced the same situation on another day, she might have acted differently-she had no compelling reason to make the choice she did. In essence, the model says the same thing. The second is MB's response to Sean's comment in Line 60. Selecting an action in line with Ball's actual choice depends on a (mis)understanding of what Seanp. 80 Alan H. Schoenfeld 81 was saying, consistent with Ball's understanding of it. But that dependence is pre- cisely as it should be: MB can be expected to make decisions like Ball's only if it has Ball's knowledge (whether that knowledge is accurate in an "objective" sense or not), goals, and beliefs. Overall, then, MB's decision making is consistent with Ball's. Some of the im- plications of this concordance are discussed in the next section of this chapter. DISCUSSION This discussion has two components, a look at the "dilemmas/decisions" dis- tinction and a commentary on the modeling enterprise. First, dilemmas and decisions. Metaphorical systems have great power, and the term dilemmas has a humanist ring to it. When we hear the term, we envision teachers being confronted with difficult choices-teachers working to resolve the inevitable tensions that result from trying to achieve many things and honor many constraints at once. In contrast, the terms models and decision making have rather reductive and dehumanizing connotations. Think, for example, of the image you conjure up when envisioning a teacher who "follows" the decision tree in Figure 2.3. The research presented in this chapter indicates that a conflict need not exist between the two characterizations. Teaching dilemmas are real, and they are felt that way: teachers do what they can to honor multiple and often conflicting goals. Many of the situations described in this chapter are of that type-at numerous points in the lesson segment, a decision by Ball to pursue one option effectively foreclosed other options. Ball's decisions were made spontaneously, amidst the flow of classroom events. She had no time for the careful consideration of options. Ball had to do what she could, on the fly, to honor her commitments and values. One of the things I find most interesting about the analysis given in this chap- ter is that it reveals a remarkable consistency underlying Ball's teaching. Ball is extremely flexible and responsive both to her students and to circumstances as they evolve in her classroom. She is, as noted above, attending to multiple and oftentimes conflicting goals. Yet her teaching decisions can be modeled with great fidelity by a reasonably straightforward decision procedure. Again, I am not suggesting that Ball follows this decision procedure either con- sciously or unconsciously. However, the fact that her teaching can be modeled suggests that it involves greater systematicity than appears on the surface-that it reflects, at a deep level, a significant amount of coherence in the way that Ball honors her commitments and values. Here is where the nature of the modeling process makes a difference. Models of the type described in this chapter are more than abstractions of regularities of behavior. The decision-making mechanism in the model calls for identifying potential decisions and for sorting through them. The decisions are made by cost-benefit analysis on the basis of the (attributed) goals, knowledge, and beliefs of the teacher. This analytic enterprise points to the sources of the decisions teachers make as they teach.p. 81 82 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions The fact that a teacher's beliefs, goals, and knowledge play such an important role in the teacher's decision making has interesting implications for professional development. It supports an argument that having teachers reflect on their deci- sion making-thinking about the options they might have considered and did not, about why they made the choices they did, and about how those choices reflect their beliefs, goals, and knowledge-can serve as a catalyst for profes- sional growth. I conclude with some notes on the status and utility of the modeling enter- prise. The analysis of Ball's lesson represented a major test case for the theory of teaching-in-context. A fundamental question regarding any such theory is its scope, that is, the range of events to which the theory can be said to apply. As discussed under "Aspects of a Theory of Teaching in Context" Berkeley's Teacher Model Group had succeeded in modeling a collection of lessons that could be seen as covering a significant amount of territory: beginning and experienced teachers con- ducting both traditional and innovative lessons. However, the lessons were all at the secondary level or above, and all were in mathematics and science classes. They were also driven by the teacher's agendas. Ball's lesson is quite something else. Issues of scope were addressed in the first major paper that described the the- ory (Schoenfeld, 1998b). The TMG had completed the analyses of lessons taught by Minstrell, Nelson, and Schoenfeld and had begun to work on Ball's January 19, 1990, lesson. We noted that we had not yet been successful in our attempts to model the lesson and that our failure (if we did fail) would serve to establish the boundaries of what we were capable of modeling. In a commentary on our work, Borko and Peressini (1998) explored possible reasons for our difficulties. They wrote, We appreciate the candidness with which Schoenfeld presented the problems his group encountered as they tried to analyze and model the Sean Numbers lesson. In this section we further explore some of the concerns he identified. Based on this exploration, we suggest that Ball's conception of teaching and the classroom mathematics pedagogy she enacts may be incompatible with the assumptions that underlie Schoenfeld's theory. (Borko & Peressini, 1998, p. 99) Borko and Peressini's argument, grounded in descriptions of teaching set forth by Lampert (1985) and Ball (1993, 1997), is that the very conception of a teacher as a "dilemma manager"-someone struggling to balance conflicting goals, of- ten improvising as he or she "juggles competing priorities and chooses particular strategies in particular situations, not because they solve problems but because they temporarily resolve conflicts in a way that makes sense for the moment" (Borko & Peressini, 1998, p. 99)-may be fundamentally incompatible with the rationalist approach that underlies the modeling enterprise. Likewise, Leinhardt (1998) voices reservations about scope: Consider the examples and claims from Schoenfeld's piece. Does it matter that all the teachers who were studied successfully are men? Probably not. Does it matter that the sample comes from high school and above? Probably yes. Does it matter that the content is mathematics/physics? Probably yes. (Leinhardt, 1998, p. 127)p. 82 Alan H. Schoenfeld 83 This latter point is crucially important to Leinhardt, who emphasizes that do- main epistemology makes a big difference. The very nature of history instruction must differ from the nature of mathematics instruction, she argues, because the essential ideas to be learned are fundamentally different. Leinhardt also empha- sizes that teaching, especially at the elementary level, is fundamentally interactive and dynamic: By their own report, teachers are constantly thinking about and responding to the specific individuals in their classes, the clusters of students in their classes, and the ghosts of students who populated former classes. Teachers enter into im- plicit and explicit conversations with these students .... Teachers may anticipate and avoid student responses, they may anticipate and build off student ideas, but they are aware of and actively respond to the specific students in the class. More importantly, teachers are juggling their own cumulative understandings against their goals and actions. (Leinhardt, 1998, p. 131) These comments underscore the importance of the Ball analysis as a test case for the TMG's work. First, Borko and Peressini suggest that the conception of "teacher as dilemma manager" is fundamentally incompatible with the notion of teaching as a modelable enterprise. The analysis in this chapter challenges that as- sumption. Formal representations of modelable behavior (e.g., the representations in Figure 2.3 or Appendix 2A) may seem cut-and-dried, and their form may tend to obscure the tensions and dilemmas over which teachers agonize. I believe, how- ever, that the modeling approach described here provides tools that help elucidate those dilemmas and the ways that teachers deal with them. Moreover, I believe that reflecting on the knowledge, goals, and beliefs that underlie the decision- making process will prove to be an important source of professional development for teachers. Does domain epistemology matter, as Leinhardt claims? Undoubtedly it does, in terms of what teachers do. Whether it limits what can be modeled remains to be seen. Do the voices of current and even past students matter? Undoubtedly they do. I hope the analysis in this chapter, in suggesting how Ball's decisions are made (see, for example, the discussion of how events prior to the lesson in question shaped Ball's response to Nathan's statement in Line 26), shows that models of the type developed here can take those voices and their echoes into account. I conclude by commenting on a specific and rather surprising finding from the current analysis. Two of the case s*tudies discussed in Schoenfeld (1998b) were a high school physics lesson taught by Jim Minstrell and a college mathematics problem- solving lesson taught by myself. On the surface-in terms of teaching style and lesson content-the classes seem to be very different. However, the modeling pro- cess pointed to similarities in the ways the two teachers solicited comments from students and orchestrated discussions around them. Both Minstrell's interactions with students and mine were modeled with relatively simple decision procedures, which turned out to be similar in structure and pointed to previously unseen paral- lels in our teaching.p. 83 84 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions When TMG began the analysis of Ball's lesson, it seemed a world apart from the other two. As noted previously, the first 6 minutes of the January 19, 1990, episode contain many unexpected twists and turns. The deep structure of that lesson seg- ment remained inaccessible to us for quite some time. Only after we developed the representation of the routine given in Figure 2.3 did we realize that it could also be used to model Minstrell's and my lessons. The parallels are surprising. Side-by-side, videos of Ball's, Minstrell's, and my classrooms look very, very different; they reveal differences in students, in con- tent, and in classroom style and dynamics. Ball was asking her students to reflect on a meeting held the previous day; Minstrell and his students were trying to determine the "best number" to represent a collection of data; my students and I were working on a complex geometry problem. At the same time, Ball, Minstrell, and I are all known for having developed a particular kind of instruction-in- struction that focuses on developing meaning and understanding, and in which classroom discussions are highly interactive. Ball, Minstrell, and I developed our instruction independently. However, the three of us share certain epistemological assumptions-and those assumptions have pedagogical consequences. All of us work to "surface" students' ideas, and to have those ideas serve as the base for reasoned classroom discourse. A truly fascinating outcome is that models of our teaching bypass the surface differences between us and point to deep and underly- ing similarities in our classroom actions and decisions. That result suggests that the kind of routine described in Figure 2.3 may be somewhat general, and that studying such a routine explicitly may be useful for teachers who want to develop highly interactive classrooms that focus on developing meaning and understand- ing. (For a detailed exploration of this conjecture, see Schoenfeld, 2002.) Acknowledgments Although this chapter has a single author, the work is the product of a truly col- laborative enterprise, the Teacher Model Group at Berkeley. Members of the group during the genesis of the paper included Julia Aguirre, Claire Bove, Ming Ho, Lani Horn, Andrew Izsak, Krystal Jones, Michael Keynes, Brett Lorie, Rodrigo Madanes, Sue Magidson, Antonio Olmedo, Tamar Posner, Manya Raman, Ann Ryu, Rachel Sacher, Alex Shefler, Natasha Speer, Joe Wagner, Rachel Westlake, and Dan Zimmerlin. Thanks to Julia Aguirre, Abraham Arcavi, Andrew Izsak, Nicki Kersting, Cathy Kessel, Sue Magidson, Ann Ryu, Natasha Speer, Joe Wagner and Dan Zimmerlin for their comments on draft versions of this manuscript. Spe- cial thanks go to Deborah Ball for her willingness to share her teaching data and her openness in discussing a wide range of issues related to her teaching. REFERENCES Arcavi, A., Kessel, C., Meira, L., & Smith, J. P. (1998). Teaching mathematical problem solving: An analysis of an emergent classroom community. In A. H. Schoenfeld, J. J. Kaput, & E. Dubinsky (Eds.), Research in collegiate mathematics education (Vol. III) (pp. 1-70). Washington, DC: Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences.p. 84 Alan H. Schoenfeld 85 Aguirre, J., & Speer, N. (2000). Examining the relationship between beliefs and goals in teacher prac- tice. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(3), 327-356. Ball, D. L. (Undated). Annotated transcript of segments of Deborah Ball's January 19, 1990, class. Distributed by Ball at the research presession to the 1997 annual meeting of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, San Diego. Ball, D. L. (January 16, 1990). Teacher's class log. Ball, D. L. (1993). With an eye on the mathematical horizon: Dilemmas of teaching elementary school mathematics. The Elementary School Journal, 93(4), 373-397. Ball, D. L. (1997). What do students know? Facing challenges of distance, context, and desire in trying to hear children. In B. J. Biddle et al., (Eds.), International handbook of teachers and teaching (pp. 769-818). New York: Macmillan. Ball, D. L. (April 4, 1999) Personal communication. Ball, D. L., & Lampert, M. (1999). Situating research within an education context: A case study in mathematics teaching and learning. In E. R. Lagemann & L. Shulman (Eds.), Issues in education research: Problems and possibilities (pp. 371-398). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Ball, D. L., & Wilson, S. J. (1996). Integrity in teaching: Recognizing the fusion of the moral and the intellectual. American Educational Research Journal, 33(1), 155-192. Borko, H., & Peressini, D. (1998). Commentary on "Toward a theory of teaching-in-context." Issues in Education, 4(1), 95-104. Lampert, M. (1985). How do teachers manage to teach? Perspectives on problems in practice. Harvard Educational Review, 55(2), 178-194. Lampert, M. (2001). Teaching problems and the problem of teaching. New Haven: Yale University Press. Leinhardt, G. (1998). On the messiness of overlapping goals and real settings. Issues in Education, 4(1), 125-132. Schoenfeld, A. H. (1998a). Reflections on a course in mathematical problem solving. In Alan H. Schoenfeld, James J. Kaput, & Ed Dubinsky (Eds.), Research in collegiate mathematics education (Vol. III) (pp. 81-113). Washington, DC: Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences. Schoenfeld, A. H. (1998b). Toward a theory of teaching-in-context. Issues in Education, 4(1), 1-94. Schoenfeld, A. H. (1999). Models of the teaching process. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(3), 243-261. Schoenfeld, H. (2002). A highly interactive discourse structure. In J. Brophy (Ed.), Social constructivist teaching: Its affordances and constraints (Vol. 9 of the series Advances in Research on Teaching), pp. 131-170. Amsterdam: JAI Press. Schoenfeld, A. H., Minstrell, J., & van Zee, E. (1999). The detailed analysis of an established teacher's non-traditional lesson. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(3), 281-325. van Zee, E., & Minstrell, J. A. The promise of a theory of teaching-in-context. Issues in Education, 4(1), 141-147. Zimmerlin, D., & Nelson, M. (1999). The detailed analysis of a beginning teacher carrying out a tra- ditional lesson. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 18(3), 263-279. APPENDIX 2A Ball Lesson Transcript, Parsing, and Teacher Goals (See pages 86-94)p. 85 86 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions APPENDIX 2A Ball Lesson Transcript, Parsing, and Teacher Goals Line Who Transcript First Level Second Level Goals: of Parsing of Parsing See Appendix B for the Goal Legend. Goals A, B, and C are overarching goals Goals D and E are major content goals Goals F,G,H,I, and J are local goals A B C D E F G HI J 1 Ball [Preliminaries] [Preliminaries] [A] Okay. A few delays, but I think we're Getting the ready to start now. class started [1] [B] I'd like to open, open the discussion today with um - I have a few questions about the meeting yesterday that I'd like to ask. [C] So, to begin with, I would just like everybody to put pens down, there's nothing to take notes about or do right now. [D] But I'd like you to be thinking back to yesterday and to the meeting that we had on even and odd numbers and zero. [E] And I have a few questions. First -'my first question is, I'd just like to hear some comments about what you thought about the meeting, what you noticed about the meeting, what you learned at the meeting, just what kinds of comments you have about yesterday's meeting? [F] And could you listen to one another's comments, so that we can um, benefit from what other people say? See what y- what you think about other people's comments? [G] Sheena, do you want to start? I- I- I liked it because, well, I like talking to other classes and, and when you talk to other classes sometimes it helps. In what way? It helps you to understand a little bit more. Was there an example of something yesterday that you understood a little bit more during the meeting? Well, I didn't think that zero was - zero, um - even or odd until yesterday they said that it could be even because of the ones on each side is odd, so that couldn't be odd. So that helped me understand it. Hmm. So y- So you thought about something that came up in the meeting that you hadn't thought about before? Okay. (Nods in agreement.) Other people's comments? Sean? [1.1] Initiation of debriefing routine, and (as planned) execution of routine through one full cycle. See sections 4.2 and 4.3 forprose and flow chart descriptions of this routine. (Decisions listed in this column are represented in Figure 3.) [DI ] = no [D3] = yes [D3] = yes [D4] = yes rg5] = yes [1.1.1] Establishing Context and background (Action A1) Classroom management [1.1.2] Posing the main question (Action A2) Classroom management Calling on student 2 Sheena 3 Ball 4 Sheena 5 SeBall 6 Sheena 7 Ball 8 Sheena 9 Ball [1.2] [1.2.1] 2nd cycle initiation of of routine 2nd cycle (Action A2) [1.1.3] Student Response [1.1.4] Request Clarification (Action A5) [1.1.5] Student Response [1.1.6] Request Clarification (Action AS) [.1.7] Student Response [1.1.8] Abstract and reframe student comment (Action A6) (Cycle ends)p. 86continuous tone image Alan H. Schoenfeld 87 APPENDIX 2A (continued) Beliefs: See Appendix C for the Belief egend. BeliefsCt 1-6 are about learning Beliefs TI-T4 are about teaching Beliefs S1-S4 are about students Beliefs C1-C5 are about classroom environments Beliefs M1-M3 are about mathematics L L L L L L T T T T S S S S C C C C C M M M 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 Relevant Knowledge Previous days' converations Experience of previous year's conversations Individual students' backgrounds Her thoughts about student understandings of the topic and about the relevant mathematics (evenness, oddness, the possibly "special" nature of 0)0 Ball has ready access to the debriefing routine - it's a standard part of her repertoire. As described in the narrative, Ball has a general scaffolding routine that she uses to get students to clarify/ elaborate their thoughts. This, combined with her specific knowledge of Sheena, suggests how much scaffolding is necessary. Part of Ball's knowledge is the ability to abstract the content of conversations with students in the service of her goals, and to present that content at an appropriate level to her students Decision-Making Ball begins the class with the intention of "debriefing" the students about the previous day's meeting. She plans to implement the "flexible, interruptable" debriefing routine described in Figure 3. Sheena's comment is on target ([D1]= no), so Ball wilm pursue it. It is vague (D[D3]=yes), so Ball will provide scaffolding to help her clarify what she means to say. [D3] = yes. Sheena's statement is still vague, so Ball will make a 2nd move for clarification, using a standard "give me an example" prompt in response to a vague statement. This time Sheena's answer is clear ([D3] = no) so Ball moves on. [D41 =yes. Ball reframes what Sheena has said at a meta-level: one hears new things at meetings. [D5] = yes Ball pursues the debriefing routine.p. 87continuous tone image 88 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions APPENDIX 2A (continued) Line Who Transcript FirsttLevel SecondiLevel Goals: of Parsing of Parsing See Appendix B for the Goal Legend. Goals A, B, and C are overarching goals Goals D and E are major content goals Goals F,G,H,I, and J are local goals 10 Sean Urn, I- I- I just want to say something to Sheena, when sh- what she said about um that, that one, um- zero has to be an odd, an evennnumber bec- I disagree because, um, because what what two things can you put together to make it? 11 Sheena Could you repeat what you said, please? 12 Ball (Aside to Betsy asking her to listen to the Sean/Sheena exchange) 13 Sean Okay, um, I disagree with you because, um, if it was an even number, how- what two things could make it? 14 Shenna Well, I could show you it. (Moves toward the chalkboard and points to the number line above the chalkboard.) Um, I forgot what his name was-but yesterday he said that this one (points to the 1 on the number line) and each- this one is odd and this one (point to negative 1 on the number line) is odd, so this one (points to 0 between them) has to be even. 15 Sean But, that doesn't mean it always is even. 16 Sheena It could he even 17 Sean It could be, but... 18 Sheena I'm not saying that is has to be even. I meant that it could be. 19 Sean,, Yousditwao (Long pause, in which tension defuses) 20 Ball [A] Before we take this up again, I underst- I- I understand that this is still a problem and that we didn't a- we didn't settle it, we're probably not going to settle it. [B] Um, there's a lot of disagreement about this issue, right? [C] And you saw that the fourth graders who have been thinking about this for a long time also disagree about it, don't they? [D] I'm still kind of interested um, in hearing some more comments about the meeting itself. [E] Sheena commented that it was good to have the two classes together because she heard an idea that she hadn't thought about and it made her think about and even revise her own idea when she was in the meeting yesterday. [F] What other comments do other people have about the meeting and what happened yesterday? [G] Mei, do you have a comment? 21 Mei iiUm, I h- I thought that zero was always going to be a even number, but from the meeting I sort of got mixed up because I heard other ideas I agree with and now I don't know which one I should agree with. 22 Ball Um-hm. So what are you going to do about that? [1.3] 3rd cycle of routine [D1 ] = no [D3] = yes [1.2.2] Student Response [1.2.3] Classroom Management Ball is monitoring for possible intervention. When the interaction comes to an end, Ball is ready to move on. Sean's comment raises other issues: [D1 ] = yes Ball decides this should be pursued: [D2] = yes Consistent with the very high activation level of goal H, Ball implements a "wait and watch" routine. [D5] = yes [1.3.1] Ask for Comments (Action A2) [1.3.2] Student Response [1.3.3] Request amplification (Action AS) [1.2.4] Ball moves to ease the tension, emphasize the idea that sorting out ideas takes time, and segue back to her agenda of debriefing. She re-establishes the context by recapping the previous discussionp. 88continuous tone image Alan H. Schoenfeld 89 APPENDIX 2A (continued) Beliefs. See Appendix C fur the Belief Legeed. Beliefs LiLh-- are ahxut learning Beliefs Ti -T4 are ahout teaching Beliefs Si-S4 are ahout students Beliefs Ci CS are about classrxxm environments Beliefs Mi1 M3 are ahxut mathematics Relevant Knowledge Mathematical content related to previous days' conversations; histories of Sean, Sheena Decision-Making The issue here was whether or not to intervene. As described in the narrative, productive and respectful student exchanges are a major goal for Ball's classroom. Beliefs related to such exchanges are triggered, and a "wait and watch" monitoring routine is activated. As is her wont, Ball lets the Sean-Sheena exchange wind down on its own. She then moves to bring closure to the exchange. She re-frames the exchange somewhat, using it to re-emphasize the idea that some mathematical ideas take a long time (and hard work) to sort out. [DS] = yes: return to the debriefing routine. Knowledge of Mei: Ball can stretch Mei with a general question because she knows Mei can handle it.p. 89continuous tone image 90 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions APPENDIX 2A (continued) Line Who Transcript First Level Second Level Goals: of Parsing of Parsing See Appendix B for the Goal Legend. Goals A, B, and C are overarching goals Goals D and E are major content goals Goals F,G,H,I, and J are local goals Um, I'm going to listen more to the discussion and find out. Other people? Nathan? Urn, first I said that um, zero was even but then I guess I revised so that zero, I think, is special because uo, I - um, even numbers, like they they make even numbers; like two, um, two makes four, and four is an even number; and four makes eight; eight is an even number; and um, like that. And, and go on like that and like one nlus onenand q.onnaddine the.samenumhers 23 Mei 24 Ball 25 Nathan 2h Ball 27 Nathan 2B Ball 2B Nathan 30 Ball 31 Betsy 32 Ball 33 Betsy 34 Ball 35 Betsy 36 Ball 37 Mei 38 Sheena 39 Ball 40 Nathan 41 Ball 42 Nathan 43 Ball: 44 Sean with the same numbers. And so 1, 1 think zero's special. [A] Can I ask you a question about what you just said? [B] And then I'll ask people for more comments about the meeting. [C] Were you saying that when you put even numbers together, you get another even number - Yeah. or were you saying that all even numbers are made up of even numbers? Yes, they are Betsy, you said something like that yesterday, too. What. Were you - were you not listening to this just now? No. Nathan said a minute ago that when you put evet numbers together you get an even number. Mm-hm. But he also said, I think, that all even numbers are made up of other even numbers. I disagree. (says something to Mei) Two even numbers just the same. Unh-uh. The same even number? Yeah, like four. [A] Like eight is four plus four? [B] Are all the even numbers - can you do that with all the even numbers? That they'd be made up of two identical even numbers? Not- not- not- [D4] = no [1.3.4] [D5] = yes Student Response [t.4] [1.4.1] 4th cycle of initiation of routine 4th cycle (Action A2) See the narrative in Section 4.3 for detail. Nathan's comment raises other issues: [01 ] =yes Ball decides this shouldhbepiursued [D2] =yes [1.4.2] Student Response [1.4.3] This long section, in which Ball speaks slowly and in which many students coment conversatso essentially of Ball asking0one guestion: Do you believe the "evenness conjecture"? Bringing Betsy into the conversationp. 90continuous tone image Alan H. Schoenfeld 91 Beliefs: See Appendix C for the Belief Legend. Beliefs LC1-6 are about learning Beliefs T1-T4 are about teaching Beliefs St-S4 are about students Beliefs C1-C5 are about classroom environments Beliefs M 1-M3 are about mathematics Relevant Knowledge Decision-Making [D3] = yes; [D4] = no. The answer given by Mei is perfect, requiring no additional comment from the teacher. [DS] = yes, and thus Ball continues implementation of the debriefing routine. A great deal of relevant knowledge is triggered by Nathan's comment. Specifically, her knowledge of where she wants the lesson to go (exploring students' conjectures about sums of even and odd numbers), and of particular particular students' histories with these conectures (e.g., Nathan's and Betsy's) is activated. Please see Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the narrative for a detailed explanation of Ball's decision to ask Nathan about whether he believes that every even number is twice some other even number. The argument, in brief, is that Ball determines that she can clarify Nathan's understanding (as well as Betsy's) in short order, without sacrificing her debriefing agenda. This will enable her to pursue the debriefing (Goals D and E) after developing a better undestanding of Nathan and Betsy's grasp of an important mathematical idea (Goals B and C) that will be pursued later in the lesson (Goal J). In addition, this allows Ball to rope Betsy into the conversation (Goal I). Ball finishes posing her question to Nathan. APPENDIX 2A (continued)p. 91continuous tone image 92 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions APPENDIX 2A (continued) Line Who Transcript First Level Second Level Goals: of Parsing of Parsing See Appendix B for the Goal Legend. Goals A, B, and C are overarching goals Goals D and E are major content goals Goals F,G,H,I, and J are local goals 4G Betsy 46 Sean 47 Mei 48 Betsy 49 Sean 50 Betsy 51 Sean 52 Nathan 53 Sean 54 Nathan 55 Betsy 56 Nathan 57 Betsy 58 Nathan 59 Ball no Sean 6t Ball 62 Sean 63 Ball 64 Sean 65 Ball 66 Nathan 67 Ball AS (closure) achieved (DSP =yes (looking toward Nathan) You can't. Like six. Six is two, two,.... Six you can't get two. Six is two odd numbers to make an even, to make an even number. Three and three - (still looking toward Nathan). You need three twos to make six. You can't put a four and a four or a ... Three twos??? (looking toward Nathan) Three's - Three is odd. Or, um - I know that, but um, um I'm talking about like two plus two is four, and four plus four is eight and I just skipped the six so I just added the ones that, that add. Like the two plus two is four, and four is an even number and I'm just talking about the things that um, like - Six can be an odd number. What I just said- the um, like two is plus two is four and four plus four is eight and- So what you're doing is you're going by twos and then what two equals from then you go from - all the way up. Yeah, I'm not going by every single number. Like, Okay. two, four, six, eight. [A] More comments about the meeting? [B] I'd really like to hear from as many people as possible what comments you had or reactions you had to being in that meeting yesterday. [C] Sean? Um, I don't have anything about the meeting yesterday, but I was just thinking about six, that it's a. . . I'm just thinking. I'm just thinking it can be an odd number, too, 'cause there could be two, four, six, and two, three twos, that'd make six ... Uh-huh... And two threes, that it could be an odd and an even number. Both. Three things to make it and there could be two things to make it. And the two things that you put together to make it were odd, right? Three and three are each odd? Uh huh, and the other, the twos were even. [A] So you're kind of - I think Nathan said then that he wasn't talking about every even number, right, Nathan? [B] Were you saying that? [C] Some of the even numbers, like six, are made up of two odds, like you just suggested. Uh-uh (agreeing with the teacher). Other people's comments? (1.4.4] Monitoring for Possible Intervention Betsy's interaction with Nathan is in some ways parallel to the Sean-Sheena exchange in [t12]. Once Betsy and Nathan begin to interact, Ball holds back to see what happens. This statement by Nathan asnwers Ball's question - he is not claiming the evenness coniecture. [1.St] initiation of 5th cycle (Action A2) [1.5.2] Student Response [1.5.3] Addressing the issue and seeking closure [1.6] [(.6.1] 6th cycle of initiation of routine 6th cycle (Action A2) [(1.5] 5th cycle of routine [D1] =yes [D2] = yes [D51 = yes A5 ,couep. 92continuous tone image Alan H. Schoenfeld 93 Beliefs: See Appendix C for the Belief Legend. Beliefs LiLb-- are about learning Beliefs Ti -T4 are about teaching Beliefs S1i-S4 ame about studenits Beliefs Ci -CS are about classroom enoironments Beliefs Mi1 M3 are about mathematics Decision-Making Betsy begins interacting with Nathan, at which point Ball takes a step back to see how the interaction will go. As described in the narrative, productive and respectful student exchanges are a major goal for Ball's classroom. Beliefs related to such exchanges are triggered, and a "wait and watch" monitoring routine is activated. With Nathan's understanding clarified, Ball has met the objectives she set out to achieve by taking the "detour" in line 26. [D5] = yes, so she returns to the debriefing plan. [D1 ] = yes and [D2] = yes. As the narrative indicates, Ball thought what she said in line 65 clarified issues for Sean. This completed another cycle of the debriefing routine. [DS] = yes, so Ball asks for more comments. APPENDIX 2A (continued) Relevant Knowledgep. 93continuous tone image 94 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions APPENDIX 2A (continued) Legend Latent, ready to be activated Present but temporarily on hold At the highest activation level Present on an ongoing basis Present throughout at a strong level At medium activation level At high activation level APPENDIX 2B High Priority Goals During This Lesson Segment Overarching Goals A. Reinforce community norms of respectful and substantive interaction, employing classroom-man- agement techniques where appropriate to do so. B. Pursue issues of mathematical substance, specifically those related to promoting mathematical dis- course (including the collective consideration of mathematical claims or arguments) as they arise during classroom discussions. C. Explore students' understanding of a topic or idea when their state of understanding is unclear to Ball. Major Content and Learning Goals for This Lesson Segment D. Debrief students on the previous day's meeting (and let the discussion take its course, as long as this course is consistent with other high-priority goals). E. Focus on how students understand their own mathematical understanding and learning, in the con- text of (and using as data) the previous day's meeting. Local Goals (in the Context of Specific Student Actions) E Have a student clarify, elaborate, or extend what he or she has said. G. Highlight a student's statement (perhaps transforming it or adapting it) in service of top-level in- structional goals. H. Monitor student exchanges attentively (a) to determine whether intervention is necessary and (b) to reflect on them later, when appropriate. I. Bring a student into the conversation by tying the conversation to something he or she has said previously. J. Build a platform for work that the teacher intends to pursue later in the lesson.p. 94continuous tone image Alan H. Schoenfeld 95 APPENDIX 2C General Description of Deborah Ball's Beliefs Active or Potentially Active at Start of Lesson on January 19, 1990 Beliefs About Learning Mathematics learning includes the following: (L ) developing a deep and connected understanding of mathematical content; (L2) developing a particular set of mathematical values, including the idea that mathematics- should make sense, can be worked through logically; (L3) learning to learn, including- reflecting on what one knows, reflecting on how one learns. Mathematics learning occurs through the following: (L4) participating in mathematical discourse, which includes- generating mathematical ideas, listening to others' mathematical ideas, and critically examining mathematical ideas, as individuals and collectively; (L5) participating in a community that supports mathematical sense-making; and (L6) articulating one's thoughts, orally and in writing. Beliefs About Teaching Teaching includes the following: (T 1) establishing, building, and maintaining a classroom community that enfranchises students and supports sense-making; (T2) probing and making sense of students' understandings and beliefs; (T3) giving highest priority to pedagogical strategies that- focus on student understanding and learning, focus student attention on content, reasoning, learning and community, provide students opportunities to express their ideas, have resolutions to mathematical issues emerge from rational classroom discourse rather than by virtue of teacher authority; (T4) valuing students' initiative, understandings, and ideas. Beliefs About Students Students- (S 1) should all feel enfranchised in the classroom community, free to express themselves; (S2) have important ideas;p. 95 96 Modeling Teachers 'Decisions (S3) should be nurtured as individuals; and (S4) can/should all behave as members of the classroom community. Beliefs About Classroom Environments A productive classroom environment- (Cl) enfranchises all students, (C2) has norms of paying attention, including listening carefully to other students as well as to the teacher, (C3) focuses on rich mathematical ideas, (C4) reflects the sense-making values of the larger mathematical community, and (C5) provides opportunities as described in "beliefs about learning" and "beliefs about teaching." Beliefs About Mathematics Mathematics- (M l) is a sense-making activity; (M2) includes certain content and process understandings, e.g., "problem solving, communication, connections, and reasoning" and NCTM Content Standards; (M3) involves a particular type of reasoning, including- justifying claims on the basis of evidence and articulated assumption (definition), and making clear and logical arguments.p. 96